
~~~
He was tall, lean, serious about his profession, said it disturbed him to see mismatched teeth. Squinting, he asked me to turn toward the light as he held an unglazed crown by my upper incisors. With a small brush he applied yellow, gray, pink, violet and green from a palette of glazes, then fired it at sixteen hundred  degrees. We went outside to check the final color, and he was pleased. Today the dentist put it in my mouth, and no one could ever guess my secret: there’s no one quite like me, and I can prove it by the unique shade of the ivory sculptures attached to bony sockets in my jaw. A gallery opens when I smile. Even the forgery gleams. 
~~~
A man celebrates erstwhile conquests,
his book locked in a silo, still in print.
 
I scribble, make Sharpie lines, deface
its text like it defaces me. Outside, grain
 
fields whisper. Marble lions are silent
yet silver-tongued, with excellent teeth.
 
In this life I have worshipped so many lies.
Then I workshop them, make them better.
 
An East India Company, an opium trade,
a war, a treaty, a concession, an occupation,
 
a man parting the veil covering a woman’s
face, his nails prying her lips open. I love
 
the fragility of a porcelain bowl. How easy
it is, to shatter chinoiserie, like the Han
 
dynasty urn Ai Weiwei dropped in 1995.
If only recovering the silenced history
 
is as simple as smashing its container: book,
bowl, celadon spoon. Such objects cross
 
borders the way our bodies never could.
Instead, we’re left with history, its blonde
 
dust. That bowl is unbreakable. All its ghosts
still shudder through us like small breaths.
 
The tome of hegemony lives on, circulates
in our libraries, in our bloodstreams. One day,
 
a girl like me may come across it on a shelf,
pick it up, read about all the ways her body
 
is a thing. And I won’t be there to protect
her, to cross the text out and say: go ahead—rewrite this.
 
~~~
I mean this thing
 
I want to write and no other
 
You will not be so clever
 
as to resurrect the feathered
 
the tatty wings of a costumed
 
angel in my dining room
 
tatty spatial realm
 
room where I exist and look at things and eat them
 
and float nine inches above the floor
 
and no one else need know
 
and no other poet
 
will do
 
 
 
The poet will do
 
what the poet will do and mime
 
or maim the poet
 
meme—in fancy
 
venue or classroom or focus
 
group the wings of the poet
 
relax and warm and shed and oracular
 
shit out the window in a pile by the side of the road
 
and the commitment of the poet
 
to engage, subvert, refract, or remand
 
is safe in my vagina at last where it belongs.
 
~~~
I was born as a woman, I talk you to death,                                                   or else your ear off,or else you to sleep. What do I have, all the timein the world, and a voice that swings brass backand forth, you can hear it, and a focal point wheremy face should be. What do I have, I have absolutepower, and what I want is your money, your drool,and your mind, and the sense of myself as a snake,and a garter in the grass. Every bone in the snakeis the hipbone, every part of the snake is the hips.The first sound I make is silence, then sssssshhh,          the first word I say is listen. Sheep shearers                      and accountants hypnotize the hardest,and lookout sailors who watch the sea, and the boyswho cut and cut and cut and cut and cut the grass.The writers who write page-turners, and the writerswho repeat themselves. The diamond-cutter kneelsdown before me and asks me to hypnotize him, andI glisten at him and glisten hard, and listen to me andlisten, I tell him. Count your age backward, I tell him.Become aware of your breathing, and aware of mine                         which will go on longer. Believe you           are a baby till I tell you otherwise, then believeyou’re a man till I tell you you’re dirt. When a gunshotrings out you’ll lie down like you’re dead. When you          hear, “He is breathing,” you’ll stand up again.The best dog of the language is Yes and protects you.The best black-and-white dog of the language is Yesand goes wherever you go, and you go where I say,you go anywhere. Why do I do it is easy, I am workingmy way through school. Give me the money                           for Modernism, and give me the moneyfor what comes next. When you wake to the fact that youhave a body, you will wake to the fact that not for long.When you wake you will come when you read the wordhard, or hard to understand me, or impenetrable poetry.When you put down the book you will come when youhear the words put down the book,                                              you will come when you hear.
~~~
I rode him through the village, smiling.
He tossed his tasseled mane in distress.
The villagers took his gesture as vanity,
and made no attempt to rein him back.
Camped at night by stream and fire,
he seemed to think stories were in order.
The ghoulish tales twisting out his mouth
no longer frightened me. On leaving,
I'd taken on a certain complacency. Later,
he'd characterize my silence as merely
mean. But what is mean about a mouth
that, having no stories, claims it can provide
no flower for the ear, no wine for the wind?
I tried: I told the tale of him, which he
(the version being mine) was not much
interested in. But all of us, the fattening
moon, the yewey trees, the sharp-toothed
stars who combed their glowing backs against
the sky like cats: we laughed. And now
that I had left, where would I take him?
He was vehicle and, as such, responsibility.
He was deadening, tiresome, and necessary.
I made ourselves a home and kept him gently
as a pet. Visitors often wonder aloud,
How do you manage to keep such a creature
inside? The floors are stained with his keep.
I tell them my heart is huge and its doors
are small. Once I took him in he grew. Now
I cannot remove him without killing him,
which, frankly, I have never wanted to do.
~~~
The following poems and collages were created for Victoria Martinez’s solo show, Celestial House, at Loyola University Museum of Art (LUMA) as odes to the homes and Chicago neighborhoods the artists grew up in. All collages are by Victoria Martinez and all poems are by José Olivarez.
 

Victoria MartinezPantry Secrets, 2018, collage, 15 × 10 in.
                            
Nation of Domination
my mom hugs me & wants me to stay. i have my foot
on the pedal. a fake gold chain on my neck. i confess
i’m a sucker. i never want magicians to reveal their secrets.
i want to live in the unknowing where everything is possible.
my mom dances with me to Los Bukis. she thinks this makes
me her baby still. perspective is a magic trick. i hit my brother
with the Rock Bottom & i bet you can guess what i leave out.
ask Farooq if you need a hint. the brain is full of magic
i don’t understand. no one signs up to take a dive. in wrestling,
there’s a team of writers who decide who wins and who loses.
the metaphor is obvious. my mom wasn’t born to play the role
of mom, i don’t care how many baby dolls she played with.
i dance with my mom to Los Bukis & you’re a fool
if you believe it’s her son she’s trying to hold on to.
 
Victoria MartinezPillow Talk, 2018, collage, 15 × 10 in.
                            
moonshine
the poets are right about the moonlight.
i take my spot of sky & deposit it
into a savings account. only after
the bank confiscated our house
did i understand. roses
don’t grow without pricked hands.
i didn’t have to spend a summer in a freezer
packing lunch meat to know the value
of sunlight. my mom didn’t have
to spend a decade wiping down floors to appreciate
education. when i give you a bouquet of roses,
i give you a bouquet of bloody hands.
a handful of dirt & the worms that doted on your roses.
when i take my piece of sky out of the bank,
it’s smaller. the drunks are right about moonshine.
 
Victoria MartinezHoyne, 2018, collage, 15 × 10 in.
                            
Shelter Island
frigid are the branches of black trees cutting through
a blacker night. missing are the lampposts that adorn
every few feet of New York. cold is your hand in my hand
& yes, i am a man, & you are a woman. my wilderness
is not unlike the woods that surround us. the sky in my wild
lit by lanterns in the faces of animals. my own flammable face.
my father’s temperament. my thrifted excuse. yes,
it’s the night before 45 is sworn in as president,
& yes, we leave the city, & we would leave the planet, too.
you hold my hand & we walk into the teeth of the hour
armed with each other. bitter cold is the world we leave behind.
when we hold hands, we invent a spaceship.
​
                
~~~
Nothing is nothing, although
he would call me that, she was nothing.
Those were his words, but his hand was lifting
cigarettes in chains and bridges
of ash-light. He said he didn't want his body to last.
It wasn't a year I could argue
against that kind of talk, so I cut the fowl
killed on the farm a mile out—brown and silvery, wild—
and put it over butter lettuce, lettuce then lime.
I heated brandy in the saucepan, poured a strip of molasses
slowly through the cold, slow as I'd seen
a shaman pour pine tincture over the floor
of my beaten house.
She seemed to see my whole life
by ordinance of some god
who wanted me alive again.
Burnt sage, blue smoke. Then sea salt shaken
into the corners of violent sadness.
She wrote my address
across her chest
to let everything listening know
where my life was made.
We waited, either forgetting what we were
or becoming more brightly human in that pine,
in her trance, in the lavender I set on the chipped sills,
not a trance at all but my deliberate hand cutting
from the yard part of what she required.
Now wait longer, she said, and I did as I would
when the molasses warmed over the pot enough
to come into the brandy,
to come into the night
begun by small confessions—
that this was just a rental, and mine just a floor,
that the woman he loved was with another man,
his mother mad, his apartment haunted in the crawl space.
Then I told of the assault at daybreak between
the houses. Heat, asphalt, all of it and my face toward
the brick school where the apostolate studied first-century script
and song. There must have been chanting,
as it was on the hour.
What we said was liturgy meant only for us
and for that night. Not for anyone else
to repeat, live by, believe. Never that.
Our only theories were inside of our hands,
flesh and land, body and prairie.
I reached to smoke down his next-to-last,
which he lit and made ready.
The poultry like a war ration
we ate all the way through.
What we wished, we said.
What we said, we found that night
by these, and no other,
means.
 
~~~
                        for JA
 
I flutter in order
to enter
the phrase’s silver.
 Jackdaws have launched nearby
this time, silk green and ripped,
the movement a kind of chafing thinking.
 
Oh he’s marking
terrain right there—
right there with his
 
unmade song. The shadow kids
whip fronds, froth air up
into heat, pure and simple
 
“violence of the eye.” Wild iris
ink, wet in the margin’s stage.
Well, hadn’t this testament begun
 
to carry its chime in stripes?
That’s when I knew he was going away
from me, towards the sound.
 
Like the ring on the table
it can’t be decentered.
Rim around the recent.
 
Ashes, ashes,
A bright tangled seeming.
 
~~~
As Whistler heard colors like a stretch of music—
long harmonies, violet to amber, double hummings of
silver, opal—so, in reverse, these three in their capsule,
free falling two hours through the black Atlantic, ears
popped, then filled with the music of Bach or Haydn,
might fashion a landscape. Low notes bring
a prairie perhaps, the sharps a smatter of flowers,
as the pip notes of sonar spring back to the screen
in little blossoms. They have come for the lost Titanic
and find instead, in the splayed beam of a headlamp,
silt fields, pale and singluar, like the snow fields
of Newfoundland.  On its one runner blade the capsule slides,
slips out through drift hummocks, through
stones the Ice Age glaciers dropped, its trail
the foot-thin trail of a dancer, who
plants, glides, at his head the flurry
of a ship's chandelier, at his back a cinch-hook of icebergs
cast down through the winds of Newfoundland.
The music these three absorb
stops with the wreckage, with words
lipped up through a microphone:flange, windlass, capstan, hull plating, then oddly, syllables
at a slant, as light might slant through window slats,stairsteps, doorknob, serving bowl, teacup, Bordeaux.
Mechanical fingers, controlled by the strokes
of a joy stick, brush over debris, lifting, replacing.
In jittery strobe lights, camera lights, all colors
ground down to a quiet palette,
angles return, corners and spirals
pull back to the human eye—as if from some
iced and black-washed atmosphere, boiler coal,
a footboard and platter, each common shape
brightened, briefly held for the sake of retrieval.
The current spins silt like a sudden storm.
With the intricacy of a body the capsule adjusts,
temperature, pressure. Someone coughs, then the three
sit waiting, as in Whistler's Sad Sea
three are waiting. All around them are dollops
of winter wind, everywhere beach and sea. No horizon
at all in this painting, just a grey/brown thrum
beach to sea. How steady his breath must have been
on the canvas, his hands on the brushstrokes
of lap robes, of bonnets and beach chairs, the pull
of a red umbrella: each simple shape
loved and awash in the landscape.
~~~
A gauze bandage wraps the land
and is unwound, stained orange with sulfates.
A series of slaps molds a mountain,
a fear uncoils itself, testing its long
cool limbs. A passing cloud
seizes up like a carburetor
and falls to earth, lies broken-
backed and lidless in the scree.
Acetylene torches now snug
in their holsters, shop-vacs
trundled back behind the dawn.
A mist becomes a murmur, becomes
a moan deepening the dust-
choked fissures in the rock O pity us
Ignatz O come to us by moonlight
O arch your speckled body over the earth.
~~~
In different cities, on different
forms of transportation, a woman read Daniel Deronda
until the year became the arbitrary pink
the calendar chose for the middle of winter.
And finally she sat in the reference section
of the public library finishing Daniel Deronda
for days at a slowing pace between piecesof newspapers and foreign language newspaperswhose syntax she enjoyed, not understanding.And when she didn't anymore she wrote in the marginsof Daniel Deronda for someonewho might never see. Thought of that personwho might never see, staring equally at the rain, equallythinking of her and of nothing in particular.Outside the news fell apart. If one choosesto be shallow or noble, or oneis born so, and if it matters. Translationsare appropriate when Nature is dormant, or when onehas nothing to say, or does not knowwhat to say. These are three different thingsbut sometimes they are the same.It is not wrong to want nice things, neitheris it wrong to want to be good, or to feel thatas a physical force of pleasure: Daniel Deronda,who does not know who he is,who thinks he does, and goes away on a boat.But the cover is a picture of a woman gambling.The air warms outside the referencesection, and also the rain. Incomprehensible news.Whenever a book ends, silence, as if a stewardship had ceased.A person can feel the bones of one's hands by stretching them.If love comes again, know better than to speak.
~~~
The most inscrutable beautiful names in this world
always do sound like diseases.
It’s because they are engorged.
G., I am a fool.
What we feel in the solar plexus wrecks us.
Halfway squatting on a crate where feeling happened. Caresses.
You know corporeal gifts besmirch thieves like me.
But she plucks a feather and my steam escapes.
                                                We’re awake
each night at pennymoon and we micro and necro.
I can’t stop. But love and what-all:
the uncomfortable position of telling the truth,
like the lotus, can’t be held long.
                                               If she knew would she
just take all her favors from my marmalade
vessel and chuck them back
into the endless reversible garment which is my life—
                                               an astonishing vanishing.
G., I know this letter is like a slice of elevator accident.
As smart folk would say,
“Everything is only Nothing’s Truck.”
I would revise it and say that everything is only
nothing, truncated.
Love,
Your Igor
~~~
Childhood
 
You came into this world trailing clouds all right,
               they just happened to be big black ones.
In the castle you drank from a poisoned goblet
               and were changed into something even bears cringe at.
When you awake baling-wired in thorns,
viceroys around you cobwebbed to their steins,
moth-eaten ermines, a muttering king—
                                               what choice do you have?
Rappel down the turret with your cap and bells.Adolescence
Handed a baton in a bad-luck relay,
you've overshot the cliff and are pinwheeling down,
flailing in time to that whistling-wind keening
that lets viewers know you will soon be compressed
under a subsequent sequence of rocks.
                                               Squashed into pleats a centimeter wide?
Stride till you're 3-D again.
 Adulthood
 
You're staggering through a dark wood,
soundtrack a fugue.
 
                                               Remember wrens risk a hand for a single seed,
                                               orchids can sprout from duff alone.
 Executive Summary
How many can you feed from your sourdough lumps?
                                               Each morning, braid a loaf. Give them away.
~~~
The clockwork saguaros sprout extra faces like planaria stroked by
               a razor. Chug
say the sparrows, emitting fluffs of steam. Chug chug say the piston-powered
               ground squirrels.
The tumbleweeds circle on retrofitted tracks, but the blue pasteboard welkin
               is much dented by little winds.
The yuccas pulse softly under the grow-light sconces.
Here is the door he will paint on the rock.
Here is the glass floor of the cliff.
He’ll enter from the west, backlit in orange isinglass, pyrite
            pendants glinting from the fringes of his voice.
~~~
I'm going to put Karen Prasse right here in front of you on this page so that you won't mistake her for something else, an example of precocity, for instance, a girl who knew that the sky (blue crayon) was above the earth (green crayon) and did not, as you had drawn it, come right down to the green on which your three bears stood. You can tell from her outfit that she is a Brownie. You can tell from her socks that she knows how to line things up, from her mouth that she may grow up mean or simply competent. Do not mistake her for an art critic: when she told you   the first day of first grade that your drawing was "wrong," you stood your ground and told her to look out the window. Miss Voss told your mom you were going to be a good example of something, although you cannot tell from the way your socks sag, nor from your posture, far from Brownie-crisp. This is not about you for a change, but about mis-perception, of which Karen was an early example. Who knows? She may have meant to be helpful, though that is not always a virtue, and gets in the way of some art.
~~~
Come, let’s go in.
The ticket-taker
has shyly grinned
and it’s almost time,
Lovely One.
Let’s go in.
The wind tonight’s too wild.
The sky too deep,
too thin. Already it’s time.
The lights have dimmed.
Come, Loveliest.
Let’s go in
and know these bodies
we do not have to own, passing
quietly as dreams, as snow.
Already leaves are falling
and music begins.
Lovely One,
it’s time.
Let’s go in.
 
~~~
The first track still almost swings. High hat and snare, even
A few bars of sax the stratosphere will singe-out soon enough.
Synthesized strings. Then something like cellophane
Breaking in as if snagged to a shoe. Crinkle and drag. White noise,
Black noise. What must be voices bob up, then drop, like metal shavings
In molasses. So much for us. So much for the flags we bored
Into planets dry as chalk, for the tin cans we filled with fire
And rode like cowboys into all we tried to tame. Listen:
The dark we've only ever imagined now audible, thrumming,
Marbled with static like gristly meat. A chorus of engines churns.
Silence taunts: a dare. Everything that disappears
Disappears as if returning somewhere.
~~~
A Greek I worked for once would always say   
that tragedies which still appall and thrill   
happen daily on a village scale.
Except that he put it the other way:   
dark doings in the sleepiest small town   
loom dire and histrionic as a play.   
Cosmic? Perhaps. Unprecedented? Not   
to the old women sitting in the sun,   
the old men planted in cafes till noon   
or midnight taking in the human scene,   
connoisseurs of past-passing-and-to-come.   
These watchers locate in their repertory   
mythic fragments of some kindred story
and draw them dripping out of memory’s well.   
Incest and adultery; exile
and murder; divine punishment; disgrace:   
the trick is to locate the right-sized piece   
of the vast puzzle-patterned tapestry
from which one ripped-out patch makes tragedy.
This highly skilled and patient process—find
a larger context, match and patch and mend—
is what the chorus in Greek tragedy   
has always done. And to this very day   
spectators comb the tangles of a tale,   
compare, remember, comment—not ideal,   
but middle-aged or older, and alert.   
Beyond the hero’s rashness or the hurt   
heart of the heroine, they’ve reached the age   
when only stars still lust for center stage.   
The chorus, at a point midway between   
the limelight and the audience, is seen   
and unseen. Lady chaperones at balls
once sat on brittle chairs against the walls.   
“My dancing days are over,” they’d both sigh   
and smile. Or take the case of poetry.
Mine used to play the heroine—me me me—
but lately, having had its fill of “I,”
tries to discern, despite its vision’s flaws,   
a shape. A piece of myth. A pattern. Laws.
~~~
We are of one mindand too much has not been saidabout all the quiet afternoons childhood offered us, lit gray like a cat, or blue, and cursed with an early moon. When father wore an apron or crept like a bear, we screamed.Nothing is so gone. Where is his record player or the channel that forked a distant year toward us,kind, slow magnet?There was a song we sharedwithout your listening, you widowed soul crawling away on your elbows.I sing it to my child, with a full hand Iflick its rapeseeds everywhere,clear, and slow,with all the sincerity its author indeed feltin his ten-gallon hatand his thin, whisky-soaked shirt.
~~~
God put his finger on my sacrumand he lifted me, he set mein the center of the universe,the curious desireof my chronically lonely life.It was cold and dark and lonelyand I was scared.There were no accessories.I burst into tears over nothing.What would Jimmy Schuyler do?wwjsd?And as quietly as the sound of Kleenexbeing pulled from a box,I sneezed.And morning, that goddess,as if she were slightly deaf,barely lifted her head off the horizonbefore laying back down.And a rose opened her portalsand the scent ran up an elephant’s trunk,or tried to.Such a long way for everything to travel!From here I look like a front moving inAn icy purple lighta poet would say belonged to a perfume stopperbelonging to his mother.When it was her nipple.You know, neither in the pastor in the future.
~~~
I use a trick to teach students
how to avoid passive voice.
 
Circle the verbs.
Imagine inserting “by zombies”
after each one.
 
Have the words been claimed
by the flesh-hungry undead?
If so, passive voice.
 
I wonder if these
sixth graders will recollect,
on summer vacation,
as they stretch their legs
on the way home
from Yellowstone or Yosemite
and the byway’s historical marker
beckons them to the
site of an Indian village—
 
Where trouble was brewing.
Where, after further hostilities, the army was directed to enter. 
Where the village was razed after the skirmish occurred.
Where most were women and children.
 
Riveted bramble of passive verbs
etched in wood—
stripped hands
breaking up from the dry ground
to pinch the meat
of their young red tongues.
~~~
Because she broke your heart, Shannon’s a badge— a seven-letter skidmark that scars up  across your chest, a flare of indelible script.  Between Death or Glory, and Mama, she rages,  scales the trellis of your rib cage;  her red hair swings down to bracket your ankles, whip  up the braid of your backbone, cuff your wrists.  She keeps  you sleepless with her afterimage,  and each pinned and martyred limb aches for more.  Her memory wraps you like a vise.  How simple the pain that trails and graces  the length of your body.  How it fans, blazes,  writes itself over in the blood’s tightening sighs,  bruises into wisdom you have no name for.
~~~
Wash of cold riverin a glacial land,Ionian water,chill, snow-ribbed sand,drift of rare flowers,clear, with delicate shell-like leaf enclosingfrozen lily-leaf,camellia texture,colder than a rose;wind-flowerthat keeps the breathof the north-wind—these and none other;intimate thoughts and kindreach out to sharethe treasure of my mind,intimate hands and deardrawn garden-ward and sea-wardall the sheer rapturethat I would taketo mould a clearand frigid statue;rare, of pure texture,beautiful space and line,marble to graceyour inaccessible shrine.
~~~
The blood of language moves through the word cell from monk’s cell to prison cell to biological cell. I don’t know why a Braille cell is called a cell. I don’t know how many blood cells Louis Braille lost when the awl he was  playing with as a small child slipped and injured his eye.
Red blood cells live some hundred days before they are worn out by their silent hustle—looping and looping, pounded through the heart’s chambered cathedral, rushing out to the farthest reaches of the body with the good news of oxygen, squeezing single file along capillaries, like anxious deer probing their tracks through the woods. Rushing, silent, looping the circuits of the body. Again, again, again. Load iron. Dump iron. Load dump squeeze hustle.
Red blood cells pushed through the capillaries that pushed through my  retinas. They broke loose to run a green swarm in the corral of my eye. But that is history. Today cells still push through the capillaries fenced off by my calloused fingerprint. This one that I run over the Braille cell, the pattern of bumps.
—
A red blood cell is measured in microns. A solitary prison cell is measured in feet. Six feet by nine feet or less. I don’t know what the unit of measure is for how living in solitary changes a person. We know that living in a confined space, without access to the long view or landscape, changes the eye. The eye, for lack of practice, loses its ability to make out what lies in the distance. I don’t have a unit of measure for what this does to the heart.
—
A Braille cell is measured in spaces in a grid—two across by three down—that can be filled with a raised dot or bump. Different combinations of dots represent different letters, punctuation, symbols, shorthand.
—
The oldest cell I find in the dictionary is the monastic cell, a place for contemplation. From the concealed place where wine was stored. As in cellar. I find Braille contemplative. I touch my index finger to a bumpy piece of paper. My hand advances slowly left to right, the touch receptors in my finger triggered by the uneven contact of paper and skin. Messages run along nerves, finger-to-brain, brain-to-finger. Cognition sizzles. Mind notices this feels different than the pathway of sound in ear to auditory processing. Listening pulls me out into the world in an infinity of directions. Touching my reading educates me on my exact location in the world, feet in shoes, weight of foot on ground, weight of bones and flesh in chair.
~~~
I should be happy with my lot: A wife and mother – is it not Enough for me to be content? What other blessing could be sent? A quiet house, and homely ways, That make each day like other days; I only see Time’s shadow now Darken the hair on baby’s brow! No world’s work ever comes to me, No beggar brings his misery; I have no power, no healing art With bruised soul or broken heart. I read the poets of the age, ’Tis lotus-eating in a cage; I study Art, but Art is dead To one who clamors to be fed With milk from Nature’s rugged breast, Who longs for Labor’s lusty rest. O foolish wish! I still should pine If any other lot were mine.
~~~
The poets are going home now,
After the years of exile,
After the northern climates
Where they worked, lectured, remembered,
Where they shivered at night
In an indifferent world.
Where God was the god of business,
And men would violate the poets’ moon,
And even the heavens become zones of war.
 
The poets are going home
To the blood-haunted villages,
To the crumbling walls, still pocked
With a spray of bullets;
To the ravine, marked with a new cross,
Where their brother died.
No one knows the precise spot where they shot him,
But there is a place now to gather, to lay wreaths.
The poets will bring flowers.
 
The poets are coming home
To the cafés, to the life of the streets at twilight,
To slip among the crowds and greet their friends;
Thee young poets, old now, limping, who lean on a cane:
Or the arm of a grandchild, peer with opaque eyes
At the frightening city, the steel and concrete towers
Sprung up in their absence.
Yet from open doorways comes the odor of grapes
Fermented, of fish, of oil, of pimiento…
 
The poets have come home
To the melodious language
That settles in their heads like moths alighting,
This language for which they starved
In a world of gutturals,
Crude monosyllables barked by strangers.
Now their own language enfolds them
With its warm vocables.
The poets are home.
 
Yes, they have come back
To look up at the yellow moon,
Cousin of that cold orb that only reflected
Their isolation.
They have returned to the olives, the light,
The sage-scented meadows,
The whitewashed steps, the tubs of geraniums,
The sere plains, the riverbanks spread with laundry,
The poppies, the vineyards, the bones of mountains.
 
Yes, poets, welcome home
To your small country
Riven by its little war
(As the world measures these events),
A country that remembers heroes and tears;
Where, in your absence, souls kept themselves alive
By whispering your words.
Now you smile at everything, even the priests, the militia,
The patient earth that is waiting to receive you.
~~~
One might understand Turner, you said, in North Atlantic skyeast-southeast from Newfoundland toward Hibernia.Cloud darker than cloud cast doubt upon muttering, pacing water, evenbacklit by a devouring glare that whitened its edges,bent the bars. Waters apart from society by choice, their living room the aftermath of accident or crime. When the storm comes,we will see into it, there will be no near and no far. In sixty-five-foot  seasfor the Ocean Ranger, green turned to black then white as moleculeschanged places in the Jeanne d’Arc Basin, the way wood passes intoflame, and communication errors into catastrophic failurefor the Piper Alpha offshore from Aberdeen.It burned freely. If I don’t come home, is my house in order?Big fear travels in the Sikorsky. Twelve-hour shifts travel with them, the deluge system, aqueous foam. Machinery’s one notehammering the heart, identity compressed with intentions, drenched,the tired body performs delicately timed, brutal tasks no trainingadequately represents and which consume the perceivable world.In beds on the drilling platform in suspended disbelief,identified by the unlovely sea’s aggression, no sleep aids,should a directive come. Underwater welders deeply unconscious.Survival suits profane in lockers. By dreams of marine flaresand inflatables, buoyant smoke, percolating fret,one is weakened. Violence enters the imagination.Clouds previously unrecorded. Unlocked, the gates of lightand technology of capture in bitumen oozing from fracturesin the earth or afloat like other fatty bodies, condensedby sun and internal salts, harassing snakes with its fumes.Light-sensitive bitumen of Judea upon which Joseph-Nicéphore Niépcerecorded the view from his bedroom. It looked nice. A new kindof evidence developed from the camera obscura of experienceand memory, love-object to dote on and ignore. Collectible photochrome postcards. Storm surge as weather segment,tornados on YouTube relieve us of our boredom. In the rain, drizzle, intermittent showers, unseasonable hurricane threatening our flight plans, against a sea heaving photogenically, straining at its chains like a monster in the flashbulbs, on wet stones astonishingly slick, we take selfies, post them, and can’t undo it.Meaning takes place in time. By elevated circumstance of Burtynsky’s drone helicopters, revolutionary lenses pester Alberta’s tar sands, sulphur ponds’ rhapsodic upturned faces, photographs that happen in our name and in the name of composition. Foreground entered at distance, the eye surveils the McMurray Formation’s freestanding ruin mid-aspect to an infinity of abstraction. A physical symptom assails our vocabulary and things acquire a literal feeling from which one does not recover. Mineral dissolution, complete. Accommodation space, low. Confinement, relatively broad, extremely complex stratigraphy, reservoirs stacked and composite. An area roughly the sizeof England stripped of boreal forest and muskeg, unburdened by hydraulic rope shovels of its overburden. Humiliated,blinded, walking in circles. Cycle of soak and dry and residue. The will creates effects no will can overturn, and that seem, with the passage of time, necessary, as the past assumes a pattern. Thought approaches the future and the future, like a heavy unconventional oil, advances. Hello infrastructure, Dodge Ram 1500, no one else wants to get killed on Highway 63, the all-weather road by the Wandering River where earthmovers remain unmoved by our schedules. White crosses in the ditches, white crosses in the glove box. The west stands for relocation, the east for lost causes. Would you conspire to serve tourists in a fish restaurant the rest of your life? I thought not. Drinks are on us bushpigs now, though this camp is no place for a tradesman. Devon’s Jackfish is five-star, an obvious exception. But Mackenzie, Voyageur, Millennium, Borealis —years ago we would have burned them to the ground. Suncor Firebag has Wi-Fi, but will track usage. Guard towers and turnstiles at Wapasu —we’re guests, after all, not prisoners, right? Efficiently squalid, briskly producing raw sewage, black mold, botulism, fleas, remorse, madness, lethargy, mud, it’s not a spiritual home, this bleach taste in the waterglass, layered garments, fried food, bitter complaint in plywood drop-ceiling bedrooms strung outon whatever and general offense and why doesn’t anyone smoke anymore. Dealers and prostitutes cultivate their terms organically, as demand matures. The Athabasca River’s color isn’t good.Should we not encourage a healthy dread of the wild places?Consider the operator crushed by a slab of ice, our electrician mauled by a bear at the front lines of project expansioninto the inhumane forest. Fear not, we are worth more than many sparrows.They pay for insignificance with their lives. It’s the structure.Jackpine Mine photographs beautifully on the shoulders of the day,in the minutes before sunset it’s still legal to hunt. One might,like Caspar David Friedrich’s Wanderer, at a certain removefrom principal events, cut a sensitive figure in the presenceof the sublime. Except you can smell it down here. Corrosivevapors unexpectedly distributed, caustic particulate infiltratesyour mood. As does the tar sands beetle whose bite scars, from whomgrown men run. Attracted by the same sorrowful chemical compoundemitted by damaged trees on which it feeds, its aural signatureapproximates the rasp of causatum rubbing its parts together.The only other living thing in situ, in the open pit where swims the bitumen, extra brilliant, dense, massive, in the Greek asphaltos,“to make stable,” “to secure.” Pharmacist’s earth that resists decay,resolves and attenuates, cleanses wounds. Once used to burnthe houses of our enemies, upgraded now to refinery-ready feedstock,raw crude flowing through channels of production and distribution. Combustion is our style. It steers all things from the black graveof Athabasca-Wabiskaw. Cold Lake. Rail lines ofLac-Mégantic. The optics are bad. We’re all downstream now.Action resembles waiting for a decision madeon our behalf, then despair after the fact. Despair which,like bitumen itself, applied to render darker tones or an emphatictenebrism, imparts a velvety lustrous disposition,but eventually discolors to a black treacle that degradesany pigment it contacts. Details in sections of Raft of the Medusacan no longer be discerned. In 1816, the Medusa’s captain,in a spasm of flamboyant incompetence, ran agroundon the African coast, and fearing the ire of his constituents,refused to sacrifice the cannons. They turned on each other,147 low souls herded onto a makeshift raft cut loose from lifeboatsof the wealthy and well-connected. The signs were there,risk/reward coefficient alive in the wind, the locomotive,small tragic towns left for work, where the only thing manufactured is the need for work. Foreshortening and a receding horizoninclude the viewer in the scene, should the viewer wishto be included in the scene. One can’t be sure if the brig, Argus,is racing to the rescue or departing. It hesitates in the distance,in its nimbus of fairer weather, the courage and compassionof a new age onboard. Géricault’s pyramidical composition —dead and dying in the foreground from which the strong succeed upwardtoward an emotional peak —an influence for Turner’s Disaster at Sea, the vortex structure ofThe Slave Ship: all those abandoned, where is thy market now?It’s difficult to imagine everyone saved, it’s unaffordable. Wavesdisproportionate, organized in depth, panic modulatingthe speaking voice. The situation so harshly primary and not beautifulwhen you don’t go to visit the seaside, but the seaside visits you,rudely, breaks in through the basement, ascends stairsto your bedroom, you can’t think of it generally then. The  constitutionof things is accustomed to hiding. Rearrangement will not suit us.Certain low-lying river deltas. Island states, coastal regions —floodwaters receding in measures like all we haven’t seen the last ofreveal in stagnancies and bloat what’s altered, as avernal exhalationsof mines and flares are altered but don’t disappear. Still,iceberg season is spectacular this year, worth the tripto photograph in evening ourselves before the abundance when, aflamein light that dissolves what it illuminates, water climbs its own red walls, vermilion in the furnaces.
~~~
In white pleated trousers, peering through green
sunshades, looking for the way the sun is red
noise, how locusts hiss to replicate the sun.
What is the visual equivalent
of syncopation? Rows of seared palms wrinkle
in the heat waves through green glass. Sprinklers
tick, tick, tick. The Watts Towers aim to split
the sky into chroma, spires tiled with rubble
nothing less than aspiration. I’ve left
minarets for sun and syncopation,
sixty-seven shades of green which I have
counted, beginning: palm leaves, front and back,
luncheon pickle, bottle glass, etcetera.
One day I will comprehend the different   
grades of red. On that day I will comprehend
these people, rhythms, jazz, Simon Rodia,
Watts, Los Angeles, aspiration.
~~~
Elizabeth Bishop leaned on a table, it cracked, both fell to the floor. A gesture gone sadly awry. This was close to fact and quickly became symbolic, bound to occur in Florida, where she was surrounded by rotting abundance and greedy insects. One moment a laughing smile, a graceful hand alighting on solid furniture, a casual shift of weight, the next, undignified splayed legs. The shell of the table proved to be stuffed with termite eggs. True, it was a fall from no great height—merely the height of herself, and although the hollowed-out table failed, at least the floor held, though probably infested by termites as well, and possibly built on a latent sinkhole, how can you tell? And how could she, smiling and easy, arm moving without forethought and permission, have forgotten fear, apparently let go of a hard-learned lesson? Enter a room as though it is strange. What you recognize may have changed, or may change without warning. Trees fall in hurricanes and on windless mornings, breaching houses where people you knew have vanished or died or stopped loving you.
~~~
(Variant printed in Samuel Daniel’s 1623 Works)



To thee, pure spirit, to thee alone addressed Is this joint work, by double interest thine, Thine by his own, and what is done of mine Inspired by thee, thy secret power impressed. My Muse with thine, itself dared to combine As mortal stuff with that which is divine: Let thy fair beams give luster to the restThat Israel’s King may deign his own, transformed In substance no, but superficial ’tire; And English guised in some sort may aspire To better grace thee what the vulgar formed: His sacred tones, age after age admire; Nations grow great in pride and pure desire So to excel in holy rites performed.   Oh, had that soul which honor brought to rest Too soon not left and reft the world of all What man could show, which we perfection call, This precious piece had sorted with the best. But ah, wide festered wounds that never shall Nor must be closed, unto fresh bleeding fall: Ah, memory, what needs this new arrest?   Yet blessed grief, that sweetness can impart Since thou art blest! Wrongly do I complain: Whatever weights my heavy thoughts sustain Dear feels my soul for thee. I know my part Nor be my weakness to thy rites a stain, Rites to aright, life-blood would not refrain: Assist me, then, that life what thine did part.   Time may bring forth what time hath yet suppressed In whom thy loss hath laid to utter waste; The wrack of time, untimely all defaced, Remaining as the tomb of life deceased, Where, in my heart the highest room thou hast; There, truly there, thy earthly being is placed, Triumph of death: in life how more than blest.   Behold, oh, that thou were now to behold This finished long perfection’s part begun, The rest but pieced, as left by thee undone. Pardon blest soul, presumption overbold,  If love and zeal hath to this error run: ’Tis zealous love, love that hath never done, Nor can enough, though justly here controlled.   But since it hath no other scope to go, Nor other purpose but to honor thee, That thine may shine, where all the Graces be; And that my thoughts (like smallest streams that flow, Pay to their sea, their tributary fee) Do strive, yet have no means to quit nor free That mighty debt of infinities I owe   To thy great worth which time to times enroll, Wonder of men, sole born, sole of thy kind Complete in all, but heavenly was thy mind, For wisdom, goodness, sweetness, fairest soul: Too good to wish, too fair for earth, refined For heaven, where all true glory rests confined; And where but there no life without control?   Oh, when from this account, this cast-up sum, This reck’ning made the audit of my woe, Sometime of rase my swelling passions know How work my thoughts, my sense is stricken dumb That would thee more than words could ever show, Which all fall short. Who knew thee best do know There lives no wit that may thy praise become.   And rest fair monuments of thy fair fame, Though not complete. Nor can we reach, in thought, What on that goodly piece time would have wrought Had divers so spared that life (but life) to frame The rest. Alas, such loss! The world hath naught Can equal it, nor, oh, more grievance brought, Yet what remains must ever crown thy name.             Receive these hymns, these obsequies receive,           (If any mark of thy secret spirit thou bear)           Made only thine, and no name else must wear.           I can no more: Dear Soul, I take my leave;           My sorrow strives to mount the highest sphere.
~~~
It was a poem
men took because it said ovary
didn’t take my
political poems
they took the one that said ovary
Are you sure it was because it 
           said ovary?
Yes, for them that’s logical.
---------------------------
Destroy another
          city 
What 
else 
is war for? So
you’ll go down
each of you does. dies in
                           whirlwind
each of you who does, dies 
          paying
for the pain you experience
         Just that 
and nothing is established
Because I am a woman
Cutting as many cords 
as tie you to me. this isn’t
           anarchy 
it isn’t anything you
           could name
You’re still here 
without ties?
because they were logical.---------------------------
Dance little asshole dance
oh he gets elected, like a Calvinist 
He says, I have these guts 
Men, I have these guts.
---------------------------
Having dedicated whole 
regions to the destruction
          you inspire, the 
logic will be to go on doing it 
doing it. Having proceeded by
the logic
         of your per-
sonal vaccuum 
you will perceive your continued
          lightlessness 
as an excuse to go on. having 
gone on 
as you have. And so one continues.
-----------------------------
Lead the boy out of
          the building on fire
his head twisted 
          upwards
all fucked
What else is there to
       know if 
one has gotten 
twisted up 
all fucked
he is a screaming fire
-----------------------------
In the explanations 
of our lives’ experience
they’ve left out this wild moment
the long mirror on the right-hand wall of the
corridor suddenly shattered
I can’t see myself anymore.
-----------------------------
I repeat that I am not frightened
          and why not 
I don’t know 
what my reactions 
are supposed to be.
-----------------------------
        “Please tell me something 
with which I’m familiar.”
isn’t there another part of now
~~~
Would you rather hear the louche pun drawn
 from glory hole, lip wrap or fingering  
or hear a tiny hammer striking wire?
Would you rather see the molten birthing glass? 
Seat Eros next to Kronos, for the banter. I heard she’s yet unplowed — I heard your quiver dangled down —  I heard you dwell in borrowed forms — love’s nothing but glimmer-to-wither, dawn’s fireflies expired. 
In this place we sift & bounce the words like dice
thrice dip a pipe into the magma, o my stars. 
Lear & Gloucester walk into a bar
debating again the color of bluffs or moors 
or cormorants: like craquelure     like damp tea leaf driftwood    no, peat steam    no, brined sand-apple ink 
Were all your letters in fact suns?
Forgotten, after all that trouble —  
Are those bellows blowing some?
A field of broken bottles, fragments blue. 
A tune invented to divert a girl.
~~~
I.
We hang clothes on the line.
His wide trousers and shirt, wind-beat,
roar small thunder from one prairie cloud.
The same rapple of flag on its pole.
Half in fear, half in jest, we laugh.
He calls us crow women.
Our black hair shines in the sun
and in the light from school windows.
He drives his car to town, upsets the dust
on buckboard hills.
We sit on the fence when he is gone.
Does he know we speak of thunder in his shirts?
We cannot do well in his school.
He reads from west to east,
The sun we follow moves the other way.
Crowbar.
Our eyes come loose from words on the page
in narrow rooms of the reservation school.
He perceives and deciphers at once.
For us
written letters will not stay on the page,
but fall like crows from the sky and hit
against the glass windows of the school.
Our day is night when we sit in rows of the classroom.
Leaves in a whirlwind from sumac groves.
Flock of crows are black starts on a white night.
II.
On the porch of the reservation school
the blackbirds walk around our feet,
fly into our head.
They call our secret name.
Dark corridors linger in our mind
We whisper the plains to one another.
We do not talk of what we cannot understand.
Black and white fleckered dresses.
Our face like our fathers.
The sun is no enemy to the eye looking west.
The brush thin as hair of old ones.
It blinds the eye, makes fire on fields,
flashes against windows like silver ribbons
on burial robes.
Hot late into the fall, windy, ready for
cold to sweep in.
The heat seems solid, but totters on the brink
of winter.
We laugh to ourselves when he returns to the
reservation school for girls.
Take his clothes from the line.
Set the table with salt and pepper, spoon, knives.
Cattails and milk-pods in a jar.
We get lard from the basement,
rub a place in the dusty window like a moon in the ancient sky.
III.
One hill larger than the others:
an old buffalo with heavy head and whiskers
nods at the ground,
grazes in my dreams, one blade at a time.
We stay in our stiff white-sheeted beds in the
dormitory room.
Buffalo wander in our dreams.
White night-dresses.
Black pods suspended in sumac groves like crows.
In the sweat lodge of sleep
we make our vision quest,
black as pitch in crevice between crow feathers.
We hang his thunder clothes in sleep,
arms reach above our beds like willows blowing slowly
by the creek.
Quietly we choke,
hold our wounded arms like papooses.
Clothes beat on lines.
Sumac groves and whirl of leaves:
a shadow of our fathers at council fires.
Red leaves, waxy as hay on fields.
We dream of schoolrooms.
Written letters on the wind.
He reads crow-marks on the page but does not know
crow.
~~~
Sometimes I wake up in the night
with a terrible headache, my mouth
blackened; a ghost looking for valuables
in the debris, I turn on a battery-powered
light, clipped to a book, I write things down
in the spirit of Marcus Aurelius
who said the finest bottle of wine
is just grape juice, passing through the liver,
no matter the beauty of a frothing glass,
or a night of big Truth-seeking, never recalled;
the importance of putting something bittersweet
into our mouths, turning it around and around
on our tongues, attaching to it, our missions,
our purpose—in the end
we are all just filters, not even
as beautiful as the plainest bird
or as zen as the meanest deer tick,
nothing is given over to, nothing new is lit.
So often it is this. I wake up, urgent, fatalistic,
with the taste of nectar on my boughs.
I replay on a loop my one stoic consistency,
my middle of the night vow,
that I will start tomorrow
the essential dismantling
of what I live.
~~~
Coleman Hawkins doing that thing
with his sax: high
and lonely as a kestrel
twirls on thermals, sorting
files of sound with a singular
finger, now alighting 
in pools of light, hovering
then fixed like whirring
wings of the insect glazed
in serous amber but
dreaming of oxygen:
Sound leading a mindinto that sobrietyof thought which poisesthe heart. Sound like that,
holding and giving out
never. Sound quickenedwith desire. Soundthe benefit of nature
in taut bolts of time, rich
polychrome threads, count:
Two-sixty. Sound blots outthe violence of affliction
bringing it home lonely
but good, letting
it bend: Wehad much more reason being
winged ones to recollect than forget.
 
~~~
as horses as for
as purple as we go
as heartbeat as if
as silverware as it were
as onion as I can   
as cherries as feared
as combustion as want
as dog collar as expected
as oboes as anyone
as umbrella as catch can
as penmanship as it gets
as narcosis as could be
as hit parade as all that
as icebox as far as I know
as fax machine as one can imagine
as cyclones as hoped
as dictionary as you like
as shadow as promised
as drinking fountain as well
as grassfire as myself
as mirror as is
as never as this
~~~
Was she of spirit race, or was she one
Of earth's least earthly daughters, one to whom
A gift of loveliness and soul is given,
Only to make them wretched?

There is an antique gem, on which her brow
Retains its graven beauty even now.
Her hair is braided, but one curl behind
Floats as enamour'd of the summer wind;
The rest is simple. Is she not too fair
Even to think of maiden's sweetest care?
The mouth and brow are contrasts. One so fraught
With pride, the melancholy pride of thought
Conscious of power, and yet forced to know
How little way such power as that can go;
Regretting, while too proud of the fine mind,
Which raises but to part it from its kind:
But the sweet mouth had nothing of all this;
It was a mouth the rose had lean'd to kiss
For her young sister, telling, now though mute,
How soft an echo it was to the lute.
The one spoke genius, in its high revealing;
The other smiled a woman's gentle feeling.
It was a lovely face: the Greek outline
Flowing, yet delicate and feminine;
The glorious lightning of the kindled eye,
Raised, as it communed with its native sky.
A lovely face the spirit's fitting shrine;
The one almost, the other quite divine.




My hand is on the lyre which never more
With its sweet commerce, like a bosom friend,
Will share the deeper thoughts which I could trust
Only to music and to solitude.
It is the very grove, the olive grove,
Where first I laid my laurel crown aside,
And bathed my fever'd brow in the cold stream;
As if that I could wash away the fire
Which from that moment kindled in my heart.
I well remember how I flung myself,
Like a young goddess, on a purple cloud
Of light and odour — the rich violets
Were so ethereal in bloom and breath:
And I — I felt immortal, for my brain
Was drunk and mad with its first draught of fame.
'Tis strange there was one only cypress tree,
And then, as now, I lay beneath its shade.
The night had seen me pace my lonely room,
Clasping the lyre I had no heart to wake,
Impatient for the day: yet its first dawn
Came cold as death; for every pulse sank down,
Until the very presence of my hope
Became to me a fear.    The sun rose up;
I stood alone 'mid thousands: but I felt
Mine inspiration; and, as the last sweep
Of my song died away amid the hills,
My heart reverb'rated the shout which bore
To the blue mountains and the distant heavenErinna's name, and on my bended knee,
Olympus, I received thy laurel crown.
 
   And twice new birth of violets have sprung,
Since they were first my pillow, since I sought
In the deep silence of the olive grove
The dreamy happiness which solitude
Brings to the soul o'erfill'd with its delight:
For I was like some young and sudden heir
Of a rich palace heap'd with gems and gold,
Whose pleasure doubles as he sums his wealth
And forms a thousand plans of festival;
Such were my myriad visions of delight.
The lute, which hitherto in Delphian shades
Had been my twilight's solitary joy,
Would henceforth be a sweet and breathing bond
Between me and my kind.    Orphan unloved,
I had been lonely from my childhood's hour,
Childhood whose very happiness is love:
But that was over now; my lyre would be
My own heart's true interpreter, and those
To whom my song was dear, would they not bless
The hand that waken'd it? I should be loved
For the so gentle sake of those soft chords
Which mingled others' feelings with mine own.
 
    Vow'd I that song to meek and gentle thoughts,
To tales that told of sorrow and of love,
To all our nature's finest touches, all
That wakens sympathy: and I should be
Alone no longer; every wind that bore,
And every lip that breathed one strain of mine,
Henceforth partake in all my joy and grief.
Oh! glorious is the gifted poet's lot,
And touching more than glorious: 'tis to be
Companion of the heart's least earthly hour;
The voice of love and sadness, calling forth
Tears from their silent fountain: 'tis to have
Share in all nature's loveliness; giving flowers
A life as sweet, more lasting than their own;
And catching from green wood and lofty pine
Language mysterious as musical;
Making the thoughts, which else had only been
Like colours on the morning's earliest hour,
Immortal, and worth immortality;
Yielding the hero that eternal name
For which he fought; making the patriot's deed
A stirring record for long after-time;
Cherishing tender thoughts, which else had pass'd
Away like tears; and saving the loved dead
From death's worst part — its deep forgetfulness.
 
From the first moment when a falling leaf,
Or opening bud, or streak of rose-touch'd sky,
Waken'd in me the flush and flow of song,
I gave my soul entire unto the gift
I deem'd mine own, direct from heaven; it was
The hope, the bliss, the energy of life;
I had no hope that dwelt not with my lyre,
No bliss whose being grew not from my lyre,
No energy undevoted to my lyre.
It was my other self that had a power;
Mine, but o'er which I had not a control.
At times it was not with me, and I felt
A wonder how it ever had been mine:
And then a word, a look of loveliness,
A tone of music, call'd it into life;
A song came gushing, like the natural tears,
To check whose current does not rest with us.
 
    Had I lived ever in the savage woods,
Or in some distant island, which the sea
With wind and wave guards in deep loneliness;
Had my eye never on the beauty dwelt
Of human face, and my ear never drank
The music of a human voice; I feel
My spirit would have pour'd itself in song,
Have learn'd a language from the rustling leaves,
The singing of the birds, and of the tide.
Perchance, then, happy had I never known
Another thought could be attach'd to song
Than of its own delight.    Oh! let me pause
Over this earlier period, when my heart
Mingled its being with its pleasures, fill'd
With rich enthusiasm, which once flung
Its purple colouring o'er all things of earth,
And without which our utmost power of thought
But sharpens arrows that will drink our blood.
Like woman's soothing influence o'er man
Enthusiasm is upon the mind;
Softening and beautifying that which is
Too harsh and sullen in itself.    How much
I loved the painter's glorious art, which forms
A world like, but more beautiful than, this;
Just catching nature in her happiest mood!
How drank I in fine poetry, which makes
The hearing passionate, fill'd with memories
Which steal from out the past like rays from clouds!
And then the sweet songs of my native vale,
Whose sweetness and whose softness call'd to mind
The perfume of the flowers, the purity
Of the blue sky; oh, how they stirr'd my soul! —
Amid the many golden gifts which heaven
Has left, like portions of its light, on earth
None hath such influence as music hath.
The painter's hues stand visible before us
In power and beauty; we can trace the thoughts
Which are the workings of the poet's mind:
But music is a mystery, and viewless
Even when present, and is less man's act,
And less within his order; for the hand
That can call forth the tones, yet cannot tell
Whither they go, or if they live or die,
When floated once beyond his feeble ear;
And then, as if it were an unreal thing,
The wind will sweep from the neglected strings
As rich a swell as ever minstrel drew.
 
    A poet's word, a painter's touch, will reach
The innermost recesses of the heart,
Making the pulses throb in unison
With joy or grief, which we can analyse;
There is the cause for pleasure and for pain:
But music moves us, and we know not why;
We feel the tears, but cannot trace their source.
Is it the language of some other state,
Born of its memory?    For what can wake
The soul's strong instinct of another world,
Like music?    Well with sadness doth it suit
To hear the melancholy sounds decay,
And think (for thoughts are life's great human links,
And mingle with our feelings) even so
Will the heart's wildest pulses sink to rest.
 
    How have I loved, when the red evening fill'd
Our temple with its glory, first, to gaze
On the strange contrast of the crimson air,
Lighted as if with passion, and flung back,
From silver vase and tripod rich with gems,
To the pale statues round, where human life
Was not, but beauty was, which seem'd to have
Apart existence from humanity:
Then, to go forth where the tall waving pines
Seem'd as behind them roll'd a golden sea
Immortal and eternal; and the boughs,
That darkly swept between me and its light,
Were fitting emblems of the worldly cares
That are the boundary between us and heaven;
Meanwhile, the wind, a wilful messenger
Lingering amid the flowers on his way,
At intervals swept past in melody,
The lutes and voices of the choral hymn
Contending with the rose-breath on his wing!
Perhaps it is these pleasures' chiefest charm,
They are so indefinable, so vague.
From earliest childhood all too well aware
Of the uncertain nature of our joys,
It is delicious to enjoy, yet know
No after-consequence will be to weep.
Pride misers with enjoyment, when we have
Delight in things that are but of the mind:
But half humility when we partake
Pleasures that are half wants, the spirit pines
And struggles in its fetters, and disdains
The low base clay to which it is allied.
But here our rapture raises us: we feel
What glorious power is given to man, and find
Our nature's nobleness and attributes,
Whose heaven is intellect; and we are proud
To think how we can love those things of earth
Which are least earthly; and the soul grows pure
In this high communing, and more divine.
 
    This time of dreaming happiness pass'd by,
Another spirit was within my heart;
I drank the maddening cup of praise, which grew
Henceforth the fountain of my life; I lived
Only in others' breath; a word, a look,
Were of all influence on my destiny:
If praise they spoke, 'twas sunlight to my soul;
Or censure, it was like the scorpion's sting.
 
And yet a darker lesson was to learn —
The hollowness of each: that praise, which is
But base exchange of flattery; that blame,
Given by cautious coldness, which still deems
'Tis safest to depress; that mockery,
Flinging shafts but to show its own keen aim;
That carelessness, whose very censure's chance;
And, worst of all, the earthly judgment pass'd
By minds whose native clay is unredeem'd
By aught of heaven, whose every thought falls foul
Plague-spot on beauty which they cannot feel,
Tainting all that it touches with itself.
O dream of fame, what hast thou been to me
But the destroyer of life's calm content!
I feel so more than ever, that thy sway
Is weaken'd over me. Once I could find
A deep and dangerous delight in thee;
But that is gone.    I am too much awake.
Light has burst o'er me, but not morning's light;
'Tis such light as will burst upon the tomb,
When all but judgment's over.    Can it be,
That these fine impulses, these lofty thoughts,
Burning with their own beauty, are but given
To make me the low slave of vanity,
Heartless and humbled?     O my own sweet power,
Surely thy songs are made for more than this!
What a worst waste of feeling and of life
Have been the imprints of my roll of time,
Too much, too long!    To what use have I turn'd
The golden gifts in which I pride myself?
They are profaned; with their pure ore I made
A temple resting only on the breath
Of heedless worshippers.    Alas! that ever
Praise should have been what it has been to me —
The opiate of my heart.    Yet I have dream'd
Of things which cannot be; the bright, the pure,
That all of which the heart may only dream;
And I have mused upon my gift of song,
And deeply felt its beauty, and disdain'd
The pettiness of praise to which at times
My soul has bow'd; and I have scorn'd myself
For that my cheek could burn, my pulses beat
At idle words.    And yet it is in vain
For the full heart to press back every throb
Wholly upon itself.    Ay, fair as are
The visions of a poet's solitude,
There must be something more for happiness;
They seek communion.    It had seem'd to me
A miser's selfishness, had I not sought
To share with others those impassion'd thoughts,
Like light, or hope, or love, in their effects.
When I have watch'd the stars write on the sky
In characters of light, have seen the moon
Come like veiled priestess from the east,
While, like a hymn, the wind swell'd on mine ear,
Telling soft tidings of eve's thousand flowers,
Has it not been the transport of my lute
To find its best delight in sympathy?
Alas! the idols which our hopes set up,
They are Chaldean ones, half gold, half clay;
We trust we are deceived, we hope, we fear,
Alike without foundation; day by day
Some new illusion is destroyed, and life
Gets cold and colder on towards its close.
Just like the years which make it, some are check'd
By sudden blights in spring; some are dried up
By fiery summers; others waste away
In calm monotony of quiet skies,
And peradventure these may be the best:
They know no hurricanes, no floods that sweep
As a God's vengeance were upon each wave;
But then they have no ruby fruits, no flowers
Shining in purple, and no lighted mines
Of gold and diamond.    Which is the best, —
Beauty and glory, in a southern clime,
Mingled with thunder, tempest; or the calm
Of skies that scarcely change, which, at the least,
If much of shine they have not, have no storms?
I know not: but I know fair earth or sky
Are self-consuming in their loveliness,
And the too radiant sun and fertile soil
In their luxuriance run themselves to waste,
And the green valley and the silver stream
Become a sandy desert.    O! the mind,
Too vivid in its lighted energies,
May read its fate in sunny Araby.
How lives its beauty in each Eastern tale,
Its growth of spices, and its groves of balm!
They are exhausted; and what is it now?
A wild and burning wilderness.    Alas!
For such similitude. Too much this is
The fate of this world's loveliest and best.
 
    Is there not a far people, who possess
Mysterious oracles of olden time,
Who say that this earth labours with a curse,
That it is fallen from its first estate,
And is now but the shade of what it was?
I do believe the tale.    I feel its truth
In my vain aspirations, in the dreams
That are revealings of another world,
More pure, more perfect than our weary one,
Where day is darkness to the starry soul.
 
    O heart of mine! my once sweet paradise
Of love and hope! how changed thou art to me!
I cannot count thy changes: thou hast lost
Interest in the once idols of thy being;
They have departed, even as if wings
Had borne away their morning; they have left
Weariness, turning pleasure into pain,
And too sure knowledge of their hollowness.
 
    And that too is gone from me; that which was
My solitude's delight!    I can no more
Make real existence of a shadowy world.
Time was, the poet's song, the ancient tale,
Were to me fountains of deep happiness,
For they grew visible in my lonely hours,
As things in which I had a deed and part;
Their actual presence had not been more true:
But these are bubbling sparkles, that are found
But at the spring's first source.    Ah! years may bring
The mind to its perfection, but no more
Will those young visions live in their own light;
Life's troubles stir life's waters all too much,
Passions chase fancies, and though still we dream,
The colouring is from reality.
 
    Farewell, my lyre! thou hast not been to me
All I once hoped.    What is the gift of mind,
But as a barrier to so much that makes
Our life endurable, — companionship,
Mingling affection, calm and gentle peace,
Till the vex'd spirit seals with discontent
A league of sorrow and of vanity,
Built on a future which will never be!
 
    And yet I would resign the praise that now
Makes my cheek crimson, and my pulses beat,
Could I but deem that when my hand is cold,
And my lip passionless, my songs would be
Number'd mid the young poet's first delights;
Read by the dark-eyed maiden in an hour
Of moonlight, till her cheek shone with its tears;
And murmur'd by the lover when his suit
Calls upon poetry to breathe of love.
I do not hope a sunshine burst of fame,
My lyre asks but a wreath of fragile flowers.
I have told passionate tales of breaking hearts,
Of young cheeks fading even before the rose;
My songs have been the mournful history
Of woman's tenderness and woman's tears;
I have touch'd but the spirit's gentlest chords, —
Surely the fittest for my maiden hand; —
And in their truth my immortality.
 
    Thou lovely and lone star, whose silver light,
Like music o'er the waters, steals along
The soften'd atmosphere; pale star, to thee
I dedicate the lyre, whose influence
I would have sink upon the heart like thine.
 
    In such an hour as this, the bosom turns
Back to its early feelings; man forgets
His stern ambition and his worldly cares,
And woman loathes the petty vanities
That mar her nature's beauty; like the dew,
Shedding its sweetness o'er the sleeping flowers
Till all their morning freshness is revived,
Kindly affections, sad but yet sweet thoughts,
Melt the cold eyes, long, long unused to weep.
O lute of mine, that I shall wake no more!
Such tearful music, linger on thy strings,
Consecrate unto sorrow and to love;
Thy truth, thy tenderness, be all thy fame!
 
~~~
For js



You were laughing no you weren't she was she was she wasn't
These aren't the right words
The people are waiting on the platform and the decisions are being themselves as usual 
You could take this silver cord and wrap it around all of your ideas 
You could you could
What is the way to make meaning
You're less busy than the machine has time for 
I poured the world in for you 
All the sun on that block
Or at least I wanted to:
Everyone is leaving but this would be an arrival your torso is a drum people come through and then they die you see the obituary in passing as the man next to you folds the paper and all these people at all these parties that cannot be the answer but what
Back above ground and it's the same sun different block same world different world 
Your friend is lying down with the thing he is carrying
Everybody is somebody's family you think you forget the sun keeps going still you keep going the world rearranges itself just so
False alarm you say and then you don't know what to say you wrap yourself in the future you wrap yourself in the past the woman gets in the taxi just in time
Everybody is it's not an easy thing to understand
False alarm you say and then you don't know what to say the sun keeps  going.
~~~
It’s mostly someonelong dead who gets curiousall over again, who once tolda book, the bookpicked clean to glowon a website now, an addresswith double slashes in it.Suddenly I loveone detail: the way they harnessedhorses or hammeredcopper, what seed — cardamom, rye — kept its small heart aloftfor a millennium.Voices in thatdark ago when I opento room light, lampor window on book — old friend — or the new computer screen.It’s not technology, either way.It’s somethingin the brain first, an inkling. Not yetyours to know.
~~~
Some are born to sweet delight.                  
 Some are born to endless night.
 —William Blake, “Auguries of Innocence”




We spend our lives trying to grasp the premise. William Blake is not, for instance,
William Blake, but rather a 19th century accountant from Cleveland on the
lam for murder & the theft of a horse. In the closing scene,
 
he is going to die, & so is Nobody, his half-Blackfoot, half-Blood guide.
Sure, this is a Western, a morality tale
                                                                     about a destiny made manifest
through the voice of a gun & a hero whose mythic flight from innocence
 
destroys him. But we all come to the end of the line soon enough.
The obvious just seems wiser
                                                     when Nobody says it. Time, it turns out,
is the most common noun in the English language, as if by constant invocation,
 
we could keep it at bay.
                                             Yesterday, I sat in another state on a large rubber ball
in my brother’s basement bouncing my newborn nephew in my arms.
His mother, on the phone with a friend, asks what we should fear more,
 
the hobo spider or the poison that kills it. I want to whisper into his ear
something that feels like knowledge:                                                                   Once upon a time, there was nothing& one day, there will be nothing again. This is the faraway place
 
to which his tiny weight calls me. If he could understand the words. I think,
he would know what I mean, having only just sprung himself
                                                                                                               from that fine sea.
Sometimes we coo to soothe him: Don’t cry, Little Bird. I know, I know.
 
But only the roar of the vacuum finally calms him,
                                                                                           for nothing sounds as much
like the lost world of the womb as the motors of our machines.
The root of travel means torture, having passed from Medieval Latin
 
into Old French. As the action opens, Johnny Depp, shot in black & white,
is already rocking into night on a train. And soon, he will begin his dying.
This is not to say that the inky band fanning across the morning blue
 
of a kestrel’s tail feathers
                                             has no meaning, or the first fingers of rust
coming into bloom on the green enameled chassis of a Corona typewriter
left in the rain.
                           Direct observation, the naturalist Niko Tinbergen assures us,
 is the only real thing. Perhaps this is what I should tell him.
                                                                                                             Or that this moment,
too, is a part of some migration. Every snow bunting composes its own song,
& a careful watcher can tell one kittiwake from its neighbor by the little dots
 
on the tips of its wings.
                                          The most used verb is also the most humble—
merely to be.
                        Nobody can teach to William Blake the auguries of William Blake.
We are, instead, our own vatic visions, bumbling prophets. Our sense of ourselves
as invented as film.
                                   Later, in an ocean-going canoe lined with cedar boughs,
he will drift out into cold breakers, two bullets in his chest. But, here,
in his small hat & wire glasses, he still seems
                                                                                 sweetly comic. He holds up a letter;
 
someone’s promised him a job. His fancy plaid suit makes him look like a clown.
~~~
Use a new conductor every time-out
you have sextet—before foreshore,
before pen name gets anywhere
near any bogey opera glass
(to avoid expulsion to any bogey
flunkey that can carry infidel)
Handle conductor gently
Put conductor on as soon as
pen name is hard
be sure rolled-up ringworm is on
the outspokenness. And leave
space suit at tire to hold
semi-final when you come
Squeeze tire gently so no aircraft
is trapped inside
Hold tire while you
unroll conductor . . . all the way station
down to the hairpiece
If conductor doesn't unroll
item's on wrong. Throw item away
Start over with a new onion
~~~
        “Let’s be the same wound if we must bleed.
         Let’s fight side by side, even if the enemy
         is ourselves: I am yours, you are mine.”
                        —Tommy Olofsson, Sweden



I’m not interested in
who suffered the most.
I’m interested in
people getting over it.
Once when my father was a boy
a stone hit him on the head.
Hair would never grow there.
Our fingers found the tender spot
and its riddle: the boy who has fallen
stands up. A bucket of pears
in his mother’s doorway welcomes him home.
The pears are not crying.
Later his friend who threw the stone
says he was aiming at a bird.
And my father starts growing wings.
Each carries a tender spot:
something our lives forgot to give us.
A man builds a house and says,
“I am native now.”
A woman speaks to a tree in place
of her son. And olives come.
A child’s poem says,
“I don’t like wars,
they end up with monuments.”
He’s painting a bird with wings
wide enough to cover two roofs at once.
Why are we so monumentally slow?
Soldiers stalk a pharmacy:
big guns, little pills.
If you tilt your head just slightly
it’s ridiculous.
There’s a place in my brain
where hate won’t grow.
I touch its riddle: wind, and seeds.
Something pokes us as we sleep.
It’s late but everything comes next.
~~~
or, The Wary Physician



A doctor, of great skill and fame, Paulo Purganti was his name, Had a good, comely, virtuous wife; No woman led a better life: She to intrigue was ev'n hard hearted: She chuckled when a bawd was carted; And thought the nation ne'er would thrive, Till all the whores were burnt alive.     On married men, that dared be bad, She thought no mercy should be had; They should be hanged, or starved, or flayed, Or served like Romish priests in Swede. In short, all lewdness she defied; And stiff was her parochial pride.     Yet, in an honest way, the dame Was a great lover of that same; And could from Scripture take her cue, That husbands should give wives their due.     Her prudence did so justly steer Between the gay and the severe,That, if in some regards, she choseTo curb poor Paulo in too close;In others, she relaxed again,And governed with a looser rein.    Thus, though she strictly did confineThe doctor from excess of wine;With oysters, eggs, and vermicelli,She let him almost burst his belly:Thus, drying coffee was denied;But chocolate that want supplied;And for tobacco—who could bear it?Filthy concomitant of claret!—(Blest resolution!) one might seeEringo roots, and Bohea tea.She often stroked the doctor's band,And stroked his beard, and kissed his hand,Kindly complained, that after noonHe went to pore on books too soon:She held it wholesomer by much,To rest a little on the couch;About his waist in bed-a-nightsShe clung on close—for fear of sprites.    The doctor understood the call,But had not always wherewithal.    The Lion's skin too short, you know,(As Plutarch's Morals finely show)Was lengthened by the Fox's tail;And Art supplies, where Strength may fail.    Unwilling then in arms to meetThe enemy he could not beat,He strove to lengthen the campaign,And save his forces by chicane.Fabius, the Roman chief, who thusBy fair retreat grew Maximus,Shows us, that all warrior can do,With force superior is cunctando.    One day, then, as the foe drew near,With Love, and Joy, and Life, and Dear,Our Don, who knew this tittle-tattleDid, sure as trumpet, call to battle,Thought it extremely à propos,To ward against the coming blow:To ward: But how? ay, there's the question:Fierce the assault, unarmed the bastion.    The doctor feigned a strange surprise;He felt her pulse; he viewed her eyes;That was too fast; these rolled too quick:She was, he said, or would be sick:He judged it absolutely good,That she should purge, and cleanse her blood.Spa-waters to that end were got:If they passed easily or not,What matters it? the lady's feverContinued as violent as ever.    For a distemper of this kind(Blackmore and Hans are of my mind)If once it youthful blood infects,And chiefly of the female sex,Is scarce removed by pill or potion;Whate'er may be our doctor's notion.    One luckless night then, as in bedThe doctor and the dame were laid,Again this cruel fever came:High pulse, short breath, and blood in flame.What measures shall poor Paulo keep    With Madam in this piteous taking?She, like Macbeth, has murdered sleep,    And won't allow him rest, though waking.Sad state of matters! when we dareNor ask for peace, nor offer war:Nor Livy nor Comines have shown,What in this juncture may be done.Grotius might own, that Paulo's case isHarder, than any which he placesAmongst his Belli, and his Pacis.He strove, alas, but strove in vain,By dint of logic to maintainThat all the sex was born to grieve,Down to her Ladyship from Eve.He ranged his tropes, and preached up patience;Backed his opinion with quotations,Divines and moralists; and run onQuite through from Seneca to Bunyan.As much in vain he bid her tryTo fold her arms, to close her eye;Telling her, rest would do her good,If any thing in Nature could:So held the Greeks quite down from Galen,Masters and princes of the calling:So all our modern friends maintain,(Though no great Greeks) in Warwick-lane.    Reduce, my Muse, the wand'ring song:A tale should never be too long.    The more he talked, the more she burned,And sighed, and tossed, and groaned, and turned:At last, I wish, said she, my dear—(And whispered something in his ear).You wish! wish on, the doctor cries:Lord! when will womankind be wise?What! in your waters; are you mad?Why, poison is not half so bad.I'll do—but I give you warning;You'll die before tomorrow morning.—'Tis kind, my dear, what you advise,The lady with a sign replies:But life, you know, at best is pain:And death is what we should disdain.So do it therefore, and adieu:For I will die for love of you.—Let wanton wives by death be scared:But, to my comfort, I'm prepared.
~~~
There’s more in words than I can teach: Yet listen, Child! — I would not preach; But only give some plain directions To guide your speech and your affections. Say not you love a roasted fowl But you may love a screaming owl, And, if you can, the unwieldy toad That crawls from his secure abode Within the mossy garden wall When evening dews begin to fall, Oh! mark the beauty of his eye: What wonders in that circle lie! So clear, so bright, our fathers said He wears a jewel in his head! And when, upon some showery day, Into a path or public way A frog leaps out from bordering grass, Startling the timid as they pass, Do you observe him, and endeavour To take the intruder into favour: Learning from him to find a reason For a light heart in a dull season. And you may love him in the pool, That is for him a happy school, In which he swims as taught by nature, Fit pattern for a human creature, Glancing amid the water bright, And sending upward sparkling light.    Nor blush if o’er your heart be stealing A love for things that have no feeling: The spring’s first rose by you espied, May fill your breast with joyful pride; And you may love the strawberry-flower, And love the strawberry in its bower; But when the fruit, so often praised For beauty, to your lip is raised, Say not you love the delicate treat, But like it, enjoy it, and thankfully eat.    Long may you love your pensioner mouse, Though one of a tribe that torment the house: Nor dislike for her cruel sport the cat Deadly foe both of mouse and rat; Remember she follows the law of her kind, And Instinct is neither wayward nor blind. Then think of her beautiful gliding form, Her tread that would scarcely crush a worm, And her soothing song by the winter fire, Soft as the dying throb of the lyre.    I would not circumscribe your love: It may soar with the Eagle and brood with the dove, May pierce the earth with the patient mole, Or track the hedgehog to his hole. Loving and liking are the solace of life, Rock the cradle of joy, smooth the death-bed of strife. You love your father and your mother, Your grown-up and your baby brother; You love your sister and your friends, And countless blessings which God sends; And while these right affections play, You live each moment of your day; They lead you on to full content, And likings fresh and innocent, That store the mind, the memory feed, And prompt to many a gentle deed: But likings come, and pass away; ’Tis love that remains till our latest day: Our heavenward guide is holy love, And will be our bliss with saints above. 
~~~
A little called anything shows shudders. Come and say what prints all day. A whole few watermelon. There is no pope. No cut in pennies and little dressing and choose wide soles and little spats really little spices. A little lace makes boils. This is not true. Gracious of gracious and a stamp a blue green white bow a blue green lean, lean on the top. If it is absurd then it is leadish and nearly set in where there is a tight head. A peaceful life to arise her, noon and moon and moon. A letter a cold sleeve a blanket a shaving house and nearly the best and regular window. Nearer in fairy sea, nearer and farther, show white has lime in sight, show a stitch of ten. Count, count more so that thicker and thicker is leaning. I hope she has her cow. Bidding a wedding, widening received treading, little leading mention nothing. Cough out cough out in the leather and really feather it is not for. Please could, please could, jam it not plus more sit in when.
~~~
At a book of detailsOf all the moments when knowledge is acquired.A sort of expanded balloonSighs and says, “We are what came before.”“The storm in the window of the mind,”The sleeping sister says while she’s walking aroundWonderland watchingA cat touching down and talking.Not a car in sight. A cemetery seen from the air.All the obelisks you could ever ask for.
~~~
A tool for piercing holes. Particularly in leather. A simple metal shaft. A knob of wood for handle, polished by its fit in the sinewy cradle of a leather-worker’s  palm. Likely the tool with which Louis Braille blinded himself as a child in France. An accident in his father’s saddle-making shop in the early years of the nineteenth century. Braille later invented a system of raised dots as a means of reading and writing for the blind. We don’t know much. Whether he was in the shop with his father or snuck in alone. Whether it was damp and rainy or whether the sun shone and brought to life the floating dust that always hung in the workshop air. Maybe it was just a little poke in the eye. A small tool, a small slip of the hand, a small injury. How a little fumble ends in blindness. It was decades before general anesthetic or antiseptics. Perhaps the doctor they rushed him to believed in the value of “laudable pus” in a wound. I don’t want to picture it. As a child, playing in his father’s saddle-making shop, did Louis Braille already know the names of the parts of a saddle—cantle, pommel, stirrup, tree? Did he know the smell and feel of each grade of leather? Of all the tools—punch and pincers, gouge and groover, chisel and awl—he chose awl. Likely the last thing he saw, a shine of metal galloping toward his eye. Is it accident that my tool for pressing hand-punched Braille is so much like a blunt, very small awl?
~~~
Sunset backlights some pine to ... a caped sponge and though I throw my gasp after a monarch there is no hitch, no hitching either to its serape or the echoing orange drawing a rope, horizon’s doubledutch.Mina Loy + Arthur Cravan As blood hits the air & goes red, so I burst outside exhilarated. He has thrown a tippet on the double-bass, which rests on its end-pin the way a singer rests on a glittering stiletto while the other foot slips on a banan—piano. The strings are not the electrified wires of a prison camp, but she’s the instrument of his escape, leaving me to educate my feelings, subtracting the red from night til a winebottle dawns green.Leonora Carrington + Max Ernst I saw the chessplayers over their griddles, all the furor of thinkingswallowed like a song in a furred flute; so it must seem when a small daughter disappears with a wife, morning reabsorbed into a lambent priori.Jacqueline Lamba + Andr
~~~
My master/father sent me up from South
Carolina to Boston as a nine-year-old.
My mother's illiterate silence has been a death.
I wonder if she still labors in his fields.
His sister, dutiful but cold as snow,
gave me a little room in her house, below
the stairs with the Irish servants, who hated me
for the fatal flaw in my genealogy.
For the first time in my life I am at home
in this bevy of scholars, my first family.
Here, the wallpapers welcome me into every room,
and the mirrors see me, not my pedigree.
My sisters, Jerusha, Emilia, Elizabeth ...
But Mama's unlettered silence is a death.
 
~~~
(1825)



1. CUVIER
                              
               Science, science, science!
               Everything is beautiful
               blown up beneath my glass.
               Colors dazzle insect wings.
               A drop of water swirls
               like marble. Ordinary
               crumbs become stalactites
               set in perfect angles
               of geometry I’d thought
               impossible. Few will
               ever see what I see
               through this microscope.
               Cranial measurements
               crowd my notebook pages,
               and I am moving closer,
               close to how these numbers
               signify aspects of
               national character.
               Her genitalia
               will float inside a labeled
               pickling jar in the Musée
               de l’Homme on a shelf
               above Broca’s brain:
               “The Venus Hottentot.”
               Elegant facts await me.
               Small things in this world are mine.
2.
There is unexpected sun today
in London, and the clouds that
most days sift into this cage
where I am working have dispersed.
I am a black cutout against
a captive blue sky, pivoting
nude so the paying audience
can view my naked buttocks.
I am called “Venus Hottentot.”
I left Capetown with a promise
of revenue: half the profits
and my passage home: A boon!
Master’s brother proposed the trip;
the magistrate granted me leave.
I would return to my family
a duchess, with watered-silk
dresses and money to grow food,
rouge and powders in glass pots,
silver scissors, a lorgnette,
voile and tulle instead of flax,
cerulean blue instead
of indigo. My brother would
devour sugar-studded non-
pareils, pale taffy, damask plums.
That was years ago. London’s
circuses are florid and filthy,
swarming with cabbage-smelling
citizens who stare and query,
“Is it muscle? bone? or fat?”
My neighbor to the left is
The Sapient Pig, “The Only
Scholar of His Race.” He plays
at cards, tells time and fortunes
by scraping his hooves. Behind
me is Prince Kar-mi, who arches
like a rubber tree and stares back
at the crowd from under the crook
of his knee. A professional
animal trainer shouts my cues.
There are singing mice here.
“The Ball of Duchess DuBarry”:
In the engraving I lurch
toward the belles dames, mad-eyed, and
they swoon. Men in capes and pince-nez
shield them. Tassels dance at my hips.
In this newspaper lithograph
my buttocks are shown swollen
and luminous as a planet.
Monsieur Cuvier investigates
between my legs, poking, prodding,
sure of his hypothesis.
I half expect him to pull silk
scarves from inside me, paper poppies,
then a rabbit! He complains
at my scent and does not think
I comprehend, but I speak
English. I speak Dutch. I speak
a little French as well, and
languages Monsieur Cuvier
will never know have names.
Now I am bitter and now
I am sick. I eat brown bread,
drink rancid broth. I miss good sun,
miss Mother’s sadza. My stomach
is frequently queasy from mutton
chops, pale potatoes, blood sausage.
I was certain that this would be
better than farm life. I am
the family entrepreneur!
But there are hours in every day
to conjur my imaginary
daughters, in banana skirts
and ostrich-feather fans.
Since my own genitals are public
I have made other parts private.
In my silence I possess
mouth, larynx, brain, in a single
gesture. I rub my hair
with lanolin, and pose in profile
like a painted Nubian
archer, imagining gold leaf
woven through my hair, and diamonds.
Observe the wordless Odalisque.
I have not forgotten my Xhosa
clicks. My flexible tongue
and healthy mouth bewilder
this man with his rotting teeth.
If he were to let me rise up
from this table, I’d spirit
his knives and cut out his black heart,
seal it with science fluid inside
a bell jar, place it on a low
shelf in a white man’s museum
so the whole world could see
it was shriveled and hard,
geometric, deformed, unnatural.
~~~
Whenever folks discuss finding themselves,
ya get kinda giggly. Maybe b/c ya found
yrself considering yr Armenian love
who preferred ya in both corset and bindi,
and it was for her ya begrudgingly waxed
yr jungle-scabbard    ...    Ya find yrself in the fret
of reclamation via musks all motherland-misty
(coconut milk, marine accord, mimosa tree). Last
weekend, ya found yrself in leggings to argue
again with yr Dominican love over the tender
texture of Texas tamales. Ya not-so-secretly want
to find yrself in a garden kissing a risk-
taking party until ya feel as good as a half-price
smoothie. Somehow, identity never finds ya
kohl-eyed in magenta blooms photographed
by a mixed-race admirer on a humid evening,
mostly b/c yr too busy galaxy-gazing
to be anyone’s so-fair-and-lovely. Was that
a touch of pride or self-pity? Probably. But ya
just can’t deal with another stranger’s surprise
at yr love of both tequila and mango lassis.
Does yr Guyanese love truly expect ya to replace
the chicken & fish in yr diet with mushrooms
that arbitrarily? You’re so black, yr told pretty
frequently. Ya don’t know what to make of it:
humanity. Ever find yrself advised by
Bangladeshi Brooklynites? Like they know
yr bae Poetry! Loves, let’s stop projecting
insecurities. But maybe it’s like when ya tried
to be cheerful after a famous poet called ya Debbie
Downer for mentioning the hurricanes in yr other
sovereignty? Never don’t find yrself coring
what music can be cleaved from a dull language
into an anomalous nationality. A personal theory:
we all behave oddly around fat titties. Now here
Poetry comes to say she wants to be an ode to what is
muddy. OK, baby. Here’s to dank difficult borders,
gardens of ingrown perennials, fractured fins,
the wings of inner menageries. Here’s to our own
empires of dirt — no one’s pruned-perfumed colonies
of exotic beauty. This is not a poem! Or is it
an efficient exercise in surviving hysteria?
~~~
Fleeing his clubs, dull honors, wives, the ageing Hardy hunches down in his potting-shed with his thumbtip-fumbled, fine- printed seed catalogue’s inflorescences— peripherally glimpsing the oxygenless blue line of the fleur-de-lys scaling his inner wrist; his chalky knuckles, his forearm’s crisp, lisse, pleated wrinkles; softly brown-spotted as a fox terrier’s belly. Yet this pleases, only this— age-speckled surfaces, sun-galls rose-speckled; puckering petals rugosely leaf-veined: the saturate, flooded stemlines’ mauves and verdures on the backlit catalogue’s tissuelike (nearly self-composting) pages—like his skin, all milliner-ribboned; yet with, barely hooded, things as they are and will be visible beneath it.
~~~
All can be measured by the standard of the capybara.Everyone is lesser than or greater than the capybara.Everything is taller or shorter than the capybara.Everything is mistaken for a Brazilian dance craze more or less frequently than the capybara.Everyone eats greater or fewer watermelons than the capybara. Everyone eats more or less bark.Everyone barks more than or less than the capybara, who also whistles, clicks, grunts, and emits what is known as his 
~~~
('Operation Iraqi Freedom')



It felt odd from the start, this war.
At the start, the 'death' of Saddam
when Baghdad was bombed, but
               he's not dead, a bizarre
                          Zapata,
and then the Scuds fired at  Kuwait
               but they weren't Scuds,
the 'chemical weapons of mass destruction
factory',  with earth banks and barbed wire
                  which wasn't one, however,
and the 'column of tanks destroyed leaving Basra'
                    which was three tanks,
the endless 'securing' of towns and cities
                      which aren't secure
even allowing for the distinction
that 'secure' does not mean 'safe',
the 'Uprising' in Basra
which no one could find there...
                                  Once
 there were poems in inverted commas, this
is a war of inverted commas. Once 
I wrote that 'poems about poems 
don't seem as abstract as they once did'
(although you don't need quotes, quoting 
yourself) and the Oxford Companion decided 
this meant I was no longer being abstract,  when
in fact I meant that poems about poems
(in that case partly a child) 
are not abstract because the abstract 
in them works through to a deeper real. Will
this war work through to the deeper real 
at last? Now it seems again, however,
that it feels odd, this war. I have paid it 
careful attention for almost a fortnight and what 
I would note here is that singular oddness
of feeling it evokes: one is alwaysat a tangent to it somehow, albeitwith despair's edgy wit. The deathshave black solidity, as if from method, nowhite napalm suddenness...I thought: is itfarce encoring tragedy, but thereis too much earnest passion in the evil,and one watches that eros like watchingspiders breed: 'It is what they do on this planet,'as a child's science fiction exercisemight observe. Spiders feed in street windowsbroken by children's bones flying, butthe US polls say yes: who want this so much.Who know what they do and also thatthey want those inverted commas, George-Bush-as-by-George-Orwell.            Is the USneed for war not 'a way to teach Americansgeography' as Bierce is often quoted, buta greed for abstractions: for the abstract, rather,not met by food or sex or fashion, byany intimate geography but this? But thenthe abstract is not the inverted commas,either, and it is those they want: the quoteswhich in two days will expire,                                the world left gasping with winded logic, the new skulls on dresses in the marketplace, damp empty dusty shoes. Günter Grass called this a 'wanted war' and perhaps that desire accounts for the oddncss of feeling: the animal impossibility of communication. In a damp concrete corner in the market, one's self-sense crouches close, alert for friendly fire. 
 
~~~
One stood among the violetslistening to a bird. One went to the toiletand was struck by the moon. One felt hopelessuntil a trumpet crash, and then lo,he became a diamond. I have a shovel.Can I turn it into a poem? On my stoveI’m boiling some milk thistle.I hope it will turn into a winged thesis before you stop reading. Look, I’m topless!Listen: approaching hooves!One drowned in a swimming pool.One removed his shoesand yearned off a bridge. One liveswith Alzheimer’s in a state facility, spittlein his white beard. Itturns out words are no help.But here I am with my shoveldigging like a foolbeside the spilth and sploshof the ungirdled sea. I can’t stop.The horses are coming, the thieves.I still haven’t found lasting love.I still want to hear violsin the little beach hotelthat’s torn down and gone.I want to see again the fishschooling and glittering like a veilwhere the waves shoveagainst the breakwater. Goneis the girl in her white sliptesting the chill with one bare foot.It’s too cold, but she goes in, socarefully, oh.
~~~
for Jerry Estrin



Snow covers
The hills one by one
Our neighborhood
Characters become
San Francisco 1874
Words later language
A photograph
At home when
Light writes 1974
Or 1979
We move whereThe Lives of My Books
Pages accumulate
Not legible as themselves
Historical time 1989
Startled leaves us
Unafraid though
Overgrown
Died in 1993
Moved in 1994
In pink stone
Earlier in "The Park"
Wrote shells and cherubs
The cathedral
The fountain
 
~~~
Is dead serious about this one, having rehearsed it for two weeks
they bring it right into the Odd Fellows Meeting Hall.
Riding the backs of the Trojan Women,
In Euripides’ great wake they are swept up,
But the women of the chorus, in black stockings and kerchiefs,
Stand up bravely to it, shawled arms thrash
In a foam of hysterical voices shrieking,
Seaweed on the wet flanks of a whale,
For each town has its Cassandra who is a little crazy,
Wed to some mystery or other and therefore painfully sensitive,
Wiser than anyone but no one listens to her, these days the terror
Reaches its red claws into back ward and living room alike,
For each town has its Andromache who is too young,
With snub nose and children just out of school
Even she cannot escape it, from the bombed city she is led out
Weeping among the ambulances,
And each community has its tart, its magical false Helen
Or at least someone who looks like her, in all the make-up she can muster,
The gorgeous mask of whatever quick-witted lie will keep her alive
At least a little while longer, on the crest of the bloody wave,
That dolorous mountain of wooden ships and water
In whose memory the women bring us this huge gift horse,
This raging animal of a play no one dares to look in the eye
For fear of what’s hidden there:
Small ragdoll figures toppling over and over
From every skyscraper and battlement hurtling
Men and women both, mere gristle in the teeth of fate.
Out over the sea of the audience our numb faces
Are stunned as Andromache’s, locked up there on the platform
Inside Euripides’ machine the women sway and struggle
One foot at a time, up the surging ladder
Of grief piled on grief, strophe on antistrophe,
In every century the same, the master tightens the screws,
Heightens the gloss of each bitter scene
And strikes every key, each word rings out
Over our terrified heads like a brass trumpet,
For this gift is an accordion, the biggest and mightiest of all,
As the glittering lacquered box heaves in and out,
Sigh upon sigh, at the topmost pitch a child
Falls through midnight in his frantically pink skin.
As the anguished queen protests, the citizens in the chorus wail
Louder and louder, the warriors depart
Without a glance backwards, these captains of the world’s death
Enslaved as they are enslavers, in a rain of willess atoms
anonymity takes over utterly: as the flaming city falls
On this bare beach, in the drab pinewood hall
The Reading Club packs up to go; scripts, coffee cups, black stockings,
Husbands and wives pile into the waiting cars
Just as we expect, life picks up and goes on
But not art: crouched back there like a stalled stallion
Stuffed in its gorgeous music box is the one gift
That will not disappear but waits, but bides its time and waits
For the next time we open it, that magical false structure
Inside whose artifice is the lesson, buried alive,
Of the grim machinations of the beautiful that always lead us
To these eternally real lamentations, real sufferings, real cries.
~~~
My father is a nod, a jilt. Bop.
Insists that 90s music is the jams they
will drop when I have children. Cancel
the station with rap-crap, the cure
for stiff-skin is the blunk of funk and
lilt of lips that pickles like sound-curry.
~~~
Gotta love us brown girls, munching on fat, swinging blue hips, decked out in shells and splashes, Lawdie, bringing them woo hips. As the jukebox teases, watch my sistas throat the heartbreak, inhaling bassline, cracking backbone and singing thru hips. Like something boneless, we glide silent, seeping 'tween floorboards, wrapping around the hims, and ooh wee, clinging like glue hips. Engines grinding, rotating, smokin', gotta pull back some. Natural minds are lost at the mere sight of ringing true hips. Gotta love us girls, just struttin' down Manhattan streets killing the menfolk with a dose of that stinging view. Hips. Crying 'bout getting old—Patricia, you need to get up off what God gave you. Say a prayer and start slinging. Cue hips.
~~~
Every seaworthy vessel a woman
whose mate, eloquent of how she handled
under the worst of weathers, hailed his goddess
of wet fire, handmaid and dockside whore.
Over the courtyard’s dry dock, linens snapped.
Brisk was the wind that claimed divine right
to salvage whatever tore loose,
brisk at the docks the trade
in foreign plumage, and the milliner,
arms full of wings, who tripped in a puddle
that brimmed with sky. Past the known world,
past the map that decorated a room
with scalloped waters where ships the size
of fingernail parings were never snagged
by the dragon-sharp islands,
a keel of leaf scraped across a pane.
A branch scratched endearments on the air
it then brushed clean as sand.
Had the woman rereading a letter
looked to the window casting her light,
she could have seen almost to land’s end,
the salt sea broken into semaphore
flashing its glassy code for tears
back to shore, seen almost to the cage on deck,
the pigeons gray as the mind,
some to bear messages home the first days out,
the rest to fatten in the hold.
~~~
In the energy crisis my city has turned to burning angel skins. I read by their light, a book of elegies. A fruit fly lands on Amichai, I slap him flat Against the page. Now it is an elegy for him, as well, And his tomb. And I am a terrible, toothless god,Stringing blades of grass between the tongues of sheep.Ash of angel fire drifts over my head, falls in my coffee. O Holy, Holy, Holy indigestion.I bribe the coming day with open windowsAnd freshly washed underwearHung out on the clothesline,Slipping hastily over the hips of winds.The winds know, all you have to do isOpen your mouth, the flies will come.
~~~
So I'm an alcoholic Catholic mother-lover
yet there is no sweetish nectar no fuzzed-peach
thing no song sing but in the word
which I'm starlessly unreachably faithful
you, pedant & you, politically righteous & you, alive
you think you can peal my sober word apart from my drunken word
my Buddhist word apart from my white sugar Thérèse word my
word to comrade from my word to my mother
but all my words are one word my lives one
my last to first wound round in finally fiberless crystalline skein
I began as a drunkard & ended as a child
I began as an ordinary cruel lover & ended as a boy who
                               read radiant newsprint
I began physically embarrassing—"bloated"—&
                               ended as a perfect black-haired laddy
I began unnaturally subservient to my mother &
                               ended in the crib of her goldenness
I began in a fatal hemorrhage & ended in a
                               tiny love's body perfect smallest one
But I began in a word & I ended in a word &                             
                               I know that word better
Than any knows me or knows that word,
                               probably, but I only asked to know it—
That word is the word when I say me bloated
                               & when I say me manly it's
The word that word I write perfectly lovingly
                               one & one after the other one
But you—you can only take it when it's that one & not
                               some other one
Or you say "he lost it" as if I (I so nothinged) could ever
                               lose the word
But when there's only one word—when
                               you know them, the words—
The words are all only one word the perfect
                               word—
My body my alcohol my pain my death are only
                               the perfect word as I
Tell it to you, poor sweet categorizers
                               Listen
Every me I was & wrote
                               were only & all (gently)
That one perfect word
 
~~~
Covet not the sun its honorarium
nor authorize the stars their grants to write.
The sojournors spotted a forest
adrift with language, but couldn't make sense of it.
The woods at odds with the usual channels
and those neighboring mountains
didn't look like pyramids, no matter the scale.
Read this part as if the sum of lilac
mattered to you. For love of someone
else's vortex, toss the luminaries aside.
In lieu of flowers, please donate
and in exchange for your sympathy I'll give you
edits on the level of the line. Poems are to war
as are ghosts to the proverbial orchard. 
Headstones offer us nothing
but an end to syntax. Microsoft 
Word inverts the sea. I read
your manuscript. Reader, I married it.
I fear for the estuaries.
They are so small this time of year.
~~~
Highlight Actions
Enable or disable annotations




This youth too long has heard the break
Of waters in a land of change.
He goes to see what suns can make
From soil more indurateindurate hardened and strange.
He cuts what holds his days together
And shuts him in, as lock on lock:
The arrowed vane announcing weather,
The tripping rackettripping racket either a paradox: light and easy din, or, light and easy motion (as of a dance)  of a clock;
Seeking, I think, a light that waits
Still as a lamp upon a shelf, —
A land with hills like rocky gates
Where no sea leaps upon itself.
But he will find that nothing dares
To be enduring, save where, south
Of hidden deserts, torn fire glares
On beauty with a rusted mouth, —
Where something dreadful and another
Look quietly upon each other.
~~~
When people have a lot
they want more
 
When people have nothing
they will happily share it
 
*
 
Some people say
never getting your way
builds character
By now our character must be
deep and wide as a continent
Africa, Australia
giant cascade of stars
spilling over our huge night
 
*
 
Where did the power go?
Did it enjoy its break?
Is power exhausted?
What is real power?
Who really has power?
Did the generator break?
Do we imagine silence
more powerful because
it might contain everything?
Quiet always lives
inside noise.
But does it get much done?
 
*
 
Silence waits
for truth to break it
 
*
 
Calendars can weep too
They want us to have better days
 
*
 
Welcome to every minute
Feel lucky you’re still in it
 
*
 
No bird builds a wall
 
*
 
Sky purse
     jingling
           change
 
*
 
Won’t give up
our hopes
            for anything!
 
*
 
Not your fault
You didn’t make the world
 
*
 
How dare this go on and on?
cried the person who believed in praying
God willing     God willing        God willing
There were others who prayed
   to ruins & stumps
 
*
 
Open palms
     hold more
 
*
 
Refuse to give
   mistakes
      too much power
 
 
*
Annoying person?
Person who told me to stay home
and do what other girls do?
If you disappeared
I still might miss you
 
*
 
Babies want to help us
They laugh
for no reason
 
*
 
Pay close attention to
a drop of water
on the kitchen table
 
*
 
You cannot say one word about religion
and exclude Ahmad
 
~~~
(Alec Soth: "Kenny and Bill—Bad Newz,
                        Grand Rapids, Minnesota")



They tilt their guitars and stare.
Each boy puts one foot toward
Us, one where a trailing wire
Would run to an amplifier
If amplifiers were there.
Bill's Gibson glitters like ore.
Kenny's Ibañez hoards
White noise in its black fretboard.
Bill's double chin shows. Is it fair
To mention his pudge? Kenny's hair
Gets stuck behind one ear.
Each of the brothers wears
A T-shirt, loose jeans, and a pair
Of bruised high-tops. A pear-
Shaped garbage bag hugs a steel bar.
The big rectangular blur
Behind them looks like the door
To a walk-in refrigerator.
Maybe dad is a restaurateur,
A diner owner who requires
Kenny to spend six hours
A week moving cases of beer,
While Bill chops potatoes, or scours
Grease from the checkerboard floor.
Bill imagines a national tour:
CBGB's. The Black Cat. Hardcore.
Or metal: the glow and allure
Of arenas and open-air
Pyrotechnics at dusk, a chauffeur.
Or do they hope modestly for
Sideman jobs, L.A. 'burbs, the secure
Work of studio engineers?
Two boys hold two guitars
In a basement kitchen, and care
What you think of them. Next year
They promise to practice more.
Right now their repertoire
Is six songs, seven chords,
Five originals, and a spare
Reworking of REM's four-
Minute anthem about a lost car:
"Can't Get There from Here."
~~~
I said love because it came closest said leave
because you did we do this peeling off each
from each each from suddenly other said
come back but meant don't go I said dead
and meant every one of those instances of
vanishment how the dead swim away from us
in time their tide their closed wooden boats
I said tide but tide was never right said tide
because we have no word for that kind of
unforgiving away I said tether when I meant
anchor when I meant stay but when I said stay
one thing I meant was against confusion
against yet another loss I meant two-faced
Janus January's god of fallen gates of trying
to look both ways and when I said farewell
I meant again don't go but it was too late I was
here in the hall this tunnel full of mirrors glass
and strange made-up faces and when I thought
funhouse I meant its opposite I meant this
rusty carnival town the men so sad they paint
their smiles in place they paint their faces
white paint their eyes wide and full of crying
 
~~~
And in that city the houses of the dead
are left empty, if the dead are famous enough;
by day the living pay to see if dust is all
      that befalls the lives they left behind.
      Coating even the glassed-in waistcoat in time,
coloring the air of the room stripped bare,
down four stories of twisted stair it falls,
      down on the dictionary no longer there.
      Empty your pockets,
empty your hearts, that empty upper room exhorts.
Forget the scrap of paper with the missing word
      for what’s missing—
      go home to your rented room.
Go on. Six cramped quills, one elbow chair, missing a leg,
held up all those years by Johnson’s willing it to hold
      his bulk—now even the “soul hath elbowroom”
      in that room where scribes scribbled out that quote.
In that city the dead never want to get up,
just as in life. What can we offer them?
      Just this dust to cover them deeper,
      kin to the soot that shadowed their days.
Kiss from a wife who no longer wanted to be touched—
love, he held, regarded with passionate affection,
      like one sex to the other, first; or, second,
      made do with the affection of a friend; or
managed merely parental tenderness, third; or, fourth,
no more than pleasure with, delighting in; or, fifth,
      no less than the reverent unwillingness to offend.
      O had a long sound, as in alone. Her opium.
On clean-shirt day he would pay a visit to his wife.Pack meant large bundle of any thing—“on your head
      a pack of sorrows.”
      Quiet. The square just off Fleet Street
so quiet Carlyle got lost on his way there.
Remember the garret floorboards’ complaint, the muffled
      ruffling of pigeons just overhead?
      Such silence we fell into
stair by stair, the house to ourselves.
Tired of London, he claimed, and one was
      tired of life. Were we just tired?
      Under the low ceiling as below deck,
up where no angle was true, we sank in deeper silence,
valedictory, the way it took us in.
      Volumes of ancient air closed around us, blank,
      weighted by the latest dust.
What had we come to the house of the dead to see? Something
exotic? The zebra presented to the queen in 1726? Something
      exactly as it might have been? Did you
      yawn first, back among the living?
You pulled me from traffic rushing downstream instead of up,
that Zambezi best forded from stripe to painted stripe,
      a “zebra crossing.” I’d looked the wrong way.
~~~
What a giant I must seem to them, an exhausted giant who dozes above her sewing.
Asleep in mid-stitch, sorting the day’s haul of cinders, rubies, griefs—
They were laughing and carrying on, their tiny silver needles flying in and out, tiny silver thimbles on their fingers.
It’s no use of course, keeping secrets from them, when chattering is almost their religion.
Some held corners of the flag like an enormous quilt, and some danced on little shelves above the workshop.
They were so merrie that I fell asleep again.
In the morning my beautiful flag was finished, every stitch in place and every seam.
So now I raise it—slowly, underneath a secret sky.
Near the door to the half-daft and the cradle of kleptocracy.
Where it rips and shivers, rips and shivers once more
And makes me furiously glad, and fills me up with serious pleasure.
~~~
Even before I saw the chambered nautilus
I wanted to sail not in the us navy
Tonight I'm waiting for you, your letter
At the same time his letter, the view of you
By him and then by me in the park, no rhymes
I saw you, this is in prose, no it's not
Sitting with the molluscs & anemones in an
Empty autumn enterprise baby you look pretty
With your long eventual hair, is love king?
What's this? A sonnet? Love's a babe we know that
I'm coming up, I'm coming, Shakespeare only stuck
To one subject but I'll mention nobody said
You have to get young Americans some ice cream
In the artificial light in which she woke
~~~
Morn on her rosy couch awoke,    Enchantment led the hour, And mirth and music drank the dews    That freshen’d Beauty’s flower, Then from her bower of deep delight,    I heard a young girl sing, ‘Oh, speak no ill of poetry,    For ’tis a holy thing.’ The Sun in noon-day heat rose high,    And on the heaving breast, I saw a weary pilgrim toil    Unpitied and unblest, Yet still in trembling measures flow’d    Forth from a broken string, ‘Oh, speak no ill of poetry,    For ’tis a holy thing.’ ’Twas night, and Death the curtains drew,    ’Mid agony severe, While there a willing spirit went    Home to a glorious sphere, Yet still it sigh’d, even when was spread   The waiting Angel’s wing, ‘Oh, speak no ill of poetry,    For ’tis a holy thing.’
~~~
When love was a question, the message arrived
in the beak of a wire and plaster bird. The coloratura
was hardly to be believed. For flight,
it took three stagehands: two
on the pulleys and one on the flute. And you
thought fancy rained like grace.
Our fog machine lost in the Parcel Post, we improvised
with smoke. The heroine dies of tuberculosis after all.
Remorse and the raw night air: any plausible tenor
might cough. The passions, I take my clues
from an obvious source, may be less like climatic events
than we conventionalize, though I’ve heard
of tornadoes that break the second-best glassware
and leave everything else untouched.
There’s a finer conviction than seamlessness
elicits: the Greeks knew a god
by the clanking behind his descent.
The heart, poor pump, protests till you’d think
it’s rusted past redemption, but
there’s tuning in these counterweights,
celebration’s assembled voice.
~~~
56.
I wanted to write the story of a metamorphosis. The story
is at least partly based on a dream I recall from the diary of
another writer. In the dream, which may not be a dream but
simply a vision the writer has while seated at his desk, an
image of a white horse appears on the wall. It is a white horse
that haunts the writer's mind. The white horse has escaped
its traces somewhere on an urban street. It is moving toward
the suburbs with an eye to the countryside. It is successful in
this movement because it progresses without hurry. It does
not gallop. It moves along the street with the gait of a horse
that drags a heavy cart behind it. The horse moves successfully
toward its liberation since it does not appear to be a fugitive.
My heart beats more quickly when I think about this story,
which I have almost certainly partially invented. The horse
hides its fear of slaughter. It plays a game.
Irony is a kind of secrecy. It is a principle of groups.
                
~~~
To grasp, like Prometheus, the fire — withoutthe power to give it away ...— Betty Adcock



At first a silhouette on the horizon, thenturning solid, like Schiller coming up the path to meetthe adorable sisters, and they, pretending not to watch, their hearts, all the time, pounding, driven by the same spring force (that would tear them apart), the same force that drivesthe salmon upriver, against the current, the odds,back to the home pool, even as the autumn mind, in spite of itself, turns backward, with the same feverish glow as autumngives to the summer’s leaves, a deceptive glamour,warming the past with an amber light, like brandy held up to the fire, or the sun sinking at duskinto the water, into the Baltic Sea each night, where, in the mythical depths of Lithuanian folktale, lies the amber castleof the female sun, burning in the dark water,a globe the color of harvest, aglowthere in the depths of the past, thoughthe amber, congealed sap of a once living force, is broken into bits, and the mythiccastle with it — strung now as beads, and hung,a charm, around the neck of a daughter,like the one in a Greek dream, picking flowers when the earth opened, and in a swirl of violet cape and the pounding of hoofs,the dark god broke out of the earthdriven by the same spring force, consequentialand mortal,and up there, hanging over the mythic fields of what recurs and recurs (though never the same,and never to be reconciled) — what is that?    A hot air balloon filled with passengers who paid to be raisedin a basket, to be up there looking down onthe ground where they live, a place shrunken nowbeneath their gaze, while their bloated shadow floats like a jellyfish in a green sea, barely a smudge on the pastures below,the trace of their passage less than a breath of smoke from a coal-fired engine — a blast of tarnished airfrom the actual past, heavy metal delivered from memory.Useless to warn the girl, whose hand will always be reaching out for the flowers, orthe sisters inflamed with Schiller, as he with the tricolordream of a world he could never inhabit ...  useless to comfort the eyeless Tiresias who knew how terrible waswisdom when it knew itself useless,  and useless to read the names on the shining black wall of the VietnamMemorial, the text of exactly what war has accomplished — and look, there, standing high above the tragic scene, not the little figures of the wise ancients that Yeats sawcarved into the deep blue stone — but there, standing highabove Arlington, against the blank lapis of the sky:a horse with the torso and head of a man, yes, it is Chiron, the last of the hybrids, the wise and terribly woundedcentaur for whom immortality was a curse,   and he gave it away to Prometheus, who stole the god’s fire and gave it away,as art gives the power to give it away,for that fire is the gift that cannot be held,for it will burn to an ash those (born and born again, war without end) who would hold it.
~~~
Pushing the seed into the ground
isn't enough. Whatever blooms
in this place is dumb and blind.
Foreclosure is a one-eyed man.
Nothing falls from a sky like this
except a little rain, never enough rain.
All night my wife looks down
the neck of my guitar
passing the bottle back and forth
like a story she's been telling for years.
So many baskets of hard bread.
You take the shovel to the ground.
The land stares back at you.
The corn drifts towards the sky.
You don't know what dirt is
until you bury your first daughter.
~~~
It is a tragedy, yes, but a confusing one. What happened to the wrestlers and where have they gone? Loulou the Pomeranian would love to know. Outdoors the hills are buried in snow, but inside a rose, a rose full-blown, a roomful of rose. The bloom and its shadow overtaking the space. The bloom proposing an impossible tomb. Of the Tachists, the master said to his friend Harry, “They paint white on white, and they believe that this is an achievement.” Harry said,  “I dare you to paint a white rose in a white room with a window looking onto a landscape covered with snow.” Now this — which even Loulou, color-blindish, can tell is red — is the master’s grandiose response to an intoxicating challenge. Synesthetically, the rose fills Loulou’s pom ears with the echoes of torch songs, longing for the wrong. Loulou is practically drunk from the smell: a heady pink, and juicy, and almost obscene. Like crushed up candies, lingering and sweet, but with an adult musk at the core: a powerful flower. In looking, Loulou’s heart becomes a house at dusk about to force  something to happen.
~~~
Frame within frame, the evolving conversation   
is dancelike, as though two could play   
at improvising snowflakes’
six-feather-vaned evanescence,
no two ever alike. All process
and no arrival: the happier we are,
the less there is for memory to take hold of,   
or—memory being so largely a predilection   
for the exceptional—come to a halt   
in front of. But finding, one evening   
on a street not quite familiar,
inside a gated
November-sodden garden, a building   
of uncertain provenance,
peering into whose vestibule we were   
arrested—a frame within a frame,   
a lozenge of impeccable clarity—
by the reflection, no, not
of our two selves, but of
dancers exercising in a mirror,
at the center
of that clarity, what we saw
was not stillness
but movement: the perfection
of memory consisting, it would seem,   
in the never-to-be-completed.
We saw them mirroring themselves,   
never guessing the vestibule
that defined them, frame within frame,   
contained two other mirrors.
~~~
A creamy tear descended here when Cupid squeezed the teat
of Venus. Dripping down the Milky Way it puddled beneath
old oak, new pine. Love’s selfish thirst did pluck a cosmic note,
set every entombed entangled bit of me in roots both new
and old to singing. I was become in earth and by harmony
a million bits of tongue and ear, sound funnels upwhorled
in song conducting cones. Fresh music from old flesh
corrected my (most melancholy) record of this last go round
the planet. Now I was first things: elementals, vegetable
and mineral in form, dust to kick it on the breeze,
loam to feed old oak, new pine, Eros-greedy energy
on hunt for nourishment, cream to suck, breast to squeeze.
~~~
Borne forward by extended increments.
                       Crawling waterward from this weed wilted shore.
Like small furred voles skittering inward, taking little
                       grounded, mirrored steps: Like this, intervals of ice
ridge and rime the pond rim. By night. As if
                       by dreaming ice might cast its million limbs
over that surface above. Its frozen tincture
                       outfolding farther, farther unfurling across. By dawn:
The moonspread scales then a foregone conclusion.
                       Constructed, transmutable truth: All day ice
shrinking from the light, reconsidering.
                       And still, in leaving, leaving its lingering
doubt, pale shadow of wingspan edgebound.
                       Near. Then again in dark the cold falling, fallen
to glow on the meniscus, ice groping forward with more
                       sliding white. Ice: Its own logic, growing:
Its horizontal precipice. Its glass
                       carapace. Night's cold and hoary
frost. Vaster still till all its heirs' outstretched
                       tips interslip, imprint with their ferny whorls
an entire span between lands.
                       To travel that unthinkably far! And then, having reached
to cry out more room!—crack
                       like a shell, heave between its crushing shores.
But which pressing which? And what boundary
                       divides water from ice, what self
solidifies against self, which is water—host or
                       whore? Ice now in spring dissolving, dissolute
reversal by increments retreating. Not I,
                       alive, here mudnudged under eaves, forming
my young egg by egg, mother's lasting bequest.
                       To nest once in heat. To hatch and be born.
 
~~~
around 530 is

a beautiful peaceful

time

you can just

hear the dog

lapping

David lifts his smoke

to his

lips forever

dangling chain

in the middle

of everything

bout the top shelf

or so. The party

at which

I sd that’s my col-

lected

works and every

one

stared my home

was so small

is it

I’m not particularly

into the task

of humility

at the moment

but I’m

not against

it

it’s like that

deflated

beach ball

on a tiny

chair

 

I think of as

joking

with the larger

one on a

painting

floating in air

my home

is large

love made it

large once

not to

get all

John Wieners

& believe

me love made

it small

once

this place

only had

sex unlike

the house

I love a house

I fear a house

a house never

gets laid

frankly who

doesn’t like

a hotel

room

I live in a

hotel

room a personal

one. A young

person very

much like me

was brutal

no personal

photographs

please   it was

anyone’s

home perfect

for a party

now I’m

going fast. How

the description

of a drug

enters

a room

& changes

the room

thus

with going

fast

say thus

if you

want to go

slow. To drink

the wrong

thing for a

moment

for you

to lick my

thigh

& your

honey

face

 

I met a dog

named

Izzie

once, I

met a

dog named Alan

the calm

person writing

her calm

poems

now & then

she shows

her sacred

heart

she opens

her chest &

a monkey

god

is taking

a shit

swinging

on his

thing. You didn’t

know I

had so

much inside

me buckets

of malice

bibles

of peace

I don’t want

to go

all library

on you

now like

my mother

the mother of

god or

my brother

named

Jack who

sat in

a deck

of cards

getting

hard

when she squeezes

in getting

cozy I know

less what

I want

to say. I can open

an entire  

room comes

out each

moment that’s

what I mean

not things

widen &

flow there’s

no purpose

to this.
~~~
The ladies men admire, I’ve heard,
Would shudder at a wicked word.
Their candle gives a single light;
They’d rather stay at home at night.
They do not keep awake till three,
Nor read erotic poetry.
They never sanction the impure,
Nor recognize an overture.
They shrink from powders and from paints ...
So far, I’ve had no complaints.
~~~
That was the day your mesmerized went awol on the shore. Each star, you said, was the same star. Beneath our sunny beach blanket an anonymous moisture spread like fur. It’s getting dark and darker.
 
Dusk is hard. Gossip travels worst when it’s low-contrast out; it stalls, and the air begins to crack. Droplets black as blood squeeze through fissures, making night.
 
What came from above—the forestscan, the cornucump, the mar—came violently on our feet. Finally, when it was time to order, you pulled yourself up from the syntax we’d shared and beckoned for me to come. It’s just like rain, I said, as if to make amends. Every arm is the same arm, you replied, and took mine.
 

* In which an unwitting traveler to a parallel universe, offered trum and toke all night, drinks himself out of his depth to drown the unknown source of his discomfort.
                
~~~
Dear Writers, I’m compiling the first in what I hope is a series of publications I’m calling artists among artists. The theme for issue 1 is “Faggot Dinosaur.” I hope to hear from you! Thank you and best wishes.  
~~~
are all that’s left of Gray’s Papaya on 8th St.
~~~
Someone said

                 that working through difficult equations

was like walking

in a pure and beautiful landscape –

                                              the numbers glowing

                                                           like works of art.

And in the same crowded room

a woman I thought I didn’t like

                                               was singing to herself –

talking and listening

                                          but singing to herself too

and instantly

                        with the logic of numbers

                                                                       I liked her

as if she had balanced something

I couldn’t.

The corridors are long and pristine

                                                          but I’m not lost –

just working

         towards some minute

                                                 or overwhelming

                                                                        equipoise.
~~~
marry at a hotel, annul ’em
nary hep male rose sullen
let alley roam, yell melon
dull normal fellow hammers omelette
divine sunrises
Osiris’s irises
his splendid mistress
is his sis Isis
creole cocoa loca
crayon gumbo boca
crayfish crayola
jumbo mocha-cola
warp maid fresh
fetish coquettish
a voyeur leers
at X-rated reels
~~~
  Henri Rouseeau, 1897



In the heat of her dream, she hears
The iron kettle boiling, its scuttle and hum
As hurried as hoofbeats across a plain.
She drops in two guinea hens. Dancing
In a ring round her skirts, the children
Cheer, “Auntie, the English song!”  Lifting
Her lute, she sings of the cat and the fiddle,
The cow jumping over the moon.  How the little
Ones hoot when the dish runs away
With the spoon.  Ah, spoon—an uncloaked
Lute, it waits to be strummed. The temptation of London, of Paris,
Of bumping along in the carriage with M. Philippe
In his top hat and greatcoat to visit
The peacocks, turquoise and gold and green, each
Roaming the Bois de Boulogne with one hundred eyes.
She sleeps in the desert, under a smiling full moon
That shines in the teal night. Quiet behind her,
A lion stands, tail erect, having sniffed
At her onyx flesh, at the ribbony stripes
His color-blindness darkens on her muslin dress,
All rainbow hues. She is lost in a dream,
Always happiest out of doors, without shoes.
~~~
So it has come to this –
insomnia at 3:15 A.M.,
the clock tolling its engine
 
like a frog following
a sundial yet having an electric
seizure at the quarter hour.
 
The business of words keeps me awake.
I am drinking cocoa,
the warm brown mama.
 
I would like a simple life
yet all night I am laying
poems away in a long box.
 
It is my immortality box,
my lay-away plan,
my coffin.
 
All night dark wings
flopping in my heart.
Each an ambition bird.
 
The bird wants to be dropped
from a high place like Tallahatchie Bridge.
 
He wants to light a kitchen match
and immolate himself.
 
He wants to fly into the hand of Michelangelo
and come out painted on a ceiling.
 
He wants to pierce the hornet’s nest
and come out with a long godhead.
 
He wants to take bread and wine
and bring forth a man happily floating in the Caribbean.
 
He wants to be pressed out like a key
so he can unlock the Magi.
 
He wants to take leave among strangers
passing out bits of his heart like hors d’oeuvres.
 
He wants to die changing his clothes
and bolt for the sun like a diamond.
 
He wants, I want.
Dear God, wouldn’t it be
good enough just to drink cocoa?
 
I must get a new bird
and a new immortality box.
There is folly enough inside this one.
 
~~~
I mean to really live? Kick a spook in the stomach and commit to yourself and not be committed. Sit through another because I got it like that yoga class where a Coldplay soundtrack competes with the upbeat white chick reminding you to be present, to thank yourself for making it to your mat. Point to any place on the map and blow it up. Blow up spots. Why you gotta blow up spots? I loved Lebanon, never quite made it. I spit out the sudden ash with Don Cherry in Marrakech. I lifted one chiseled leg so high over my head Magic City had called and the ATL was ready to blow me up and I said, please. Do I do. What you do. Sing with me. Another shooter made it first and the ACLU was a petty bunch of pseudo-saviors but they blew up spots that one day. So many sad stories you start laughing at the wrong time and you thought yours was one ’til the time working at Ailey with the girl whose mom was killed by her very own daddy in front of the just-say-no rainbow she drew him in class. She wears heavy aquamarine eyeshadow and closes the gap between feeling and being. I’m glad you’re Dorothy Dandridge. Ban on that word, daddy. Banksy sees the zoo in you and cages hisself in bluer notes. I go wild and will, and will. Myth is a special kind of killer and I love her atonal smile. Without her we’d all go bye-bye, point to a place in the rap and make it a black hole, let it suck us in hug the cuckolded sucker emcees and let it hold us against our certain demolition. Without her you would find it hard to live. All the opiates would shrivel into sickle cell and all the blood running through the streets would keep on believing in bodies —  what obsolete machines, the only ones worth saving. Thank yourself for making it     for being present for the cold ache you sit with and rock into situations     for the way you exploded in nuclear winter and thought you had dreamed it     and made a new world bent as your denial     reached forth to caress it all and it shocked your fingertips     this is the bravest numbness
~~~
If faith is a tree that sorrow grows
and women, repentant or not, are swamps,
a man who comes for solace here   
will be up to his knees and slow
getting out. A name can turn on anyone.   
But say that a woman washes the dust
from a stranger’s feet
and sits quite dry-eyed in front
of her mirror at night.
The candle flame moves with her breath, as does
the hand of the painter, who sees in the flame   
his chance for virtuosity. She lets him leave
her shoulder bare.
Bedlam’s distilled from a Mary too,
St. Mary’s of Bethlehem, shelter   
for all the afflicted and weak
of mind. The donors conceived of as magi   
no doubt. The mad and the newborn
serve equally well for show.   
A whore with a heart, the rich
with a conscience, the keepers of language   
and hospitals badly embarrassed at times
by their charge. The mirror refuses
the candle, you see. And tears on another’s behalf
are not
the mirrors he’s pleased to regard.
Who loves his ironies buxom and grave   
must hate the foolish water of her eyes.
 
~~~
I said cake
I said top hat
I said microphone
four little golden baby heads
wait I said pirate ghost
wait wait I said closed eye smiling cat
he scrawled back oh my god
I thought fuck yeah I can read this at the marathon
he said Eileen smilesehhh I can use it
the bell of my computer rang
same message
wait the cat is crying with relief
the cat is a devil now
the cat is not mad
the cat making racialized jazz
uh or not my white hands
I’m talking to everyone now.
and I’m using a filter. No I’m not
I acknowledge that there is an
image of me twice. I only recently
learned the term jazz hands
if we fucked Pennsylvania up what is our
hope to live in a stolen country that was always stolen
and worked largely by stolen people. Out of a conservative
diaspora came I mongrel poet from Massachusetts
to make my marklove & these things and opportunities
to speak. We can’t fall down we teem in the new opportunity
we discover what resistance means
our time & blowing up the inside of my computer
buck studies
the phone says delivered
what is.
Adam says did you see my beard.
We talk about money awhile
I ride my bike. Get off the phone goes
ding. It’s his beard calling. I go oh.
you have what I want.
he says lol
then skull
then rocket
then turkey
green pistol
and a flame. I
don’t know what to say back to that
I say bike and go.
~~~
Where was it that we went that night?
That long, low building: floodlights
rimmed in lavender, the moon ringed
in rose. I would rather, then, have stayed
 
outside, where spiderwebs glowed
like jellyfish in the damp yew hedges,
where the paths were chalky pebbles
set with giant stepping stones.
 
But the film was starting. In the air-
conditioned dark, a crowd of strangers,
strange families (not from our church)
in rows of metal folding chairs to see
 
a man quartered by horses: strain
stitched across his shining back
then, all over at once, an unraveling
and then the spill of meat;
 
a girl pushed through a doorway,
naked among soldiers:
she grew a dress to cover herself,
a blue dress with a blinding sash.
~~~
I do not understand the poets who tell me that I should not personify. Every morning the willow auditions for a new role outside my bedroom window—today she is Clytemnestra; yesterday a Southern Belle, lost in her own melodrama, sinking on her skirts. Nor do I like the mathematicians who tell me I cannot say, "The zinnias are counting on their fingers," or "The dog is practicing her geometry," even though every day I watch her using the yard's big maple as the apex of a triangle from which she bisects the circumference of the lawn until she finds the place where the rabbit has escaped, or the squirrel upped the ante by climbing into a new Euclidian plane. She stumbles across the lawn, eyes pulling her feet along, gaze fixed on a rodent working the maze of the oak as if it were his own invention, her feet tangling in the roots of trees, and tripping, yes, even over themselves, until I go out to assist, by pointing at the squirrel, and repeating, "There! There!" But instead of following my outstretched arm to the crown of the tree, where the animal is now lounging under a canopy of leaves, catching its breath, charting its next escape, she looks to my mouth, eager to read my lips, confident that I—who can bring her home from across the field with a word, who can speak for the willow and the zinnia— can surely charm a squirrel down from a tree.
~~~
    I believe there is a song that is stranger than wind, that sips the scald
from the telling, toss, toss. In the room I move in, a wrecked boy listened
to each sky’s erasing, for it was shrill winter, for it was blast and blur.
For it was farther from the native birds and the gray heath heather and
the uncaressable thighs of the one who shook in violet. Those who fly
farthest must always burn the nest. But the mind in its implacable spec-
trum dims to brown. Must you die on your back like a cheap engine, rust
and wrack? In the crevicing days, there are no words for prizing, be-
tween the lidless moon and the silver hands of the fountain. But if it is
space you must fail in, teach it din.
                
~~~
Is worth any number of old ladies.
A grandmother hung from a cliff
like a tense moment in an action
movie and the Ode, speaking itself
with its hand on one heart, steadfastly
refused to save her, in fact it did that thing
where it ground each finger out with
a motorcycle boot and then ate
its cigarette for emphasis, whooping;
some old-ass bitch was in pussy church
when the Öde, now spelling itself
with an umlaut, swung its urn
at the back of her head, really clocking her;
till the violets in her church hat grew
from the floor and won a third-place
prize for consciousness;
the Ode is pushing nanas off bridges,
detonating them with dynamite,
tying them to railroad tracks with
squeaky young rope, pouring big glugs
into them out of the skull-and-crossbones
bottle, the Ode is checking
its pocketwatch, which points always
to death-to-old-ladies o’clock,
it is shrieking ugh you’re like onehundred and your breath smellsexactly like horse medicineho, the Ode is blasting holes in them,
is laying them out in the potpourri
aisle, is stabbing them with those icicles
they always said were dangerous,
the Ode means ill to all
of them, the Ode is worth any number    ...    
and the worst is I believe it. The worst is I will
become one, without having written anything like
the Ode on a Grecian Urn, and sit in long rows
along with my kind, till there the Ode comes striding
toward me, my necessary death at the ready,
my pulse like black grapes at its fingertips,
saying, “Fear not, it will be fast, the forgetting
of great poems will fly through you in bullets”;
beauty is truth, and truth    ...    
but already I am losing it,
all I know is that the world is falling away,
and you won’t believe what it is wearing,
the ridiculous pantsuit of me, a old lady,
crumpled hopelessly at the crotch,
a flower valiant in its little butthole
— all the vital syllables are being erased — 
its space-age fabric now seen for what it is:
an embarrassment, my name is turning
into Edna, Myrtle, Dorcas, my descendants
find my peppermints disgusting,
the urn is approaching to scatter me
over a landscape that is heaven on earth,
and in the feet of the poem I am running
— in mad pursuit, and struggle to escape — 
chased as if I am worth one million,
Pearl, Opal, Ruby, Coral,
until I am caught by the feeble arm,
and because it is true I am telling
the Ode: you stood in me like a spine,
put poppies behind my eyes,
just the fact of you, that he took
one raw spring to set you down
instead of going out to tip heifers,
tweak noses, or sexually harass
huge curvy vases, you were for me
too, though they would trade me
in all my Beulahs, have lined me up
to enter that land in my turn, you let me
memorize your most satiny parts
and repeat them in hospital waiting rooms,
first to myself, and then almost out loud,
mine, mine, the world’s, all mine,
something to say in the face of tall sickness
as I quietly try to unwrap hard candies,
as I tug down tissues from my sleeve,
because it is true I am telling you, Ode,
that I had a throat and you boiled in it,
and the Ode is murmuring almost gently,
“But do you like my ending?
Some people don’t like my ending,”
I don’t, I never did, I thought it was
so overwrought,
though now that I’m here myself why not
if it has to be this way
then better
put a bright red cough on all that white
~~~
Here, in the withered arbor, like the arrested wind,   
Straight sides, carven knees,
Stands the statue, with hands flung out in alarm   
Or remonstrances.
Over the lintel sway the woven bracts of the vine   
In a pattern of angles.
The quill of the fountain falters, woods rake on the sky   
Their brusque tangles.
The birds walk by slowly, circling the marble girl,   
The golden quails,
The pheasants, closed up in their arrowy wings,   
Dragging their sharp tails.
The inquietudes of the sap and of the blood are spent.   
What is forsaken will rest.
But her heel is lifted,—she would flee,—the whistle of the birds   
Fails on her breast.
~~~
ninety-nine names for my god
though i know none for my [     ]
a failing not of my deity but of
my arabic      not the language
itself rather the overeager mosaic
i hoard      i steal       i borrow
from pop songs          & mine
from childhood fluency    i guard
my few swearwords like tinkling
silver anklets     spare & precious
& never nearly enough to muster
a proper arabic anger      proper arabic
vulgarity     only a passing spar
always using the names of animals
i am not polite         i am only inarticulate
overproud      of my little arsenal
a stranger blows a wet tobacco kiss
through the window    of my taxi
& i deploy     my meager weapons
[dog]          [pig]         [donkey]
& finally        my crown jewel
i pass my tongue across my teeth
crane my neck about the window
& call        [your mother’s                  ]
~~~
Husband, today could you and I behold  The sun that brought us to our bridal morn Rising so splendid in the winter sky (We though fair spring returned), when we were wed; Could the shades vanish from these fifteen years, Which stand like columns guarding the approach To that great temple of the double soul That is as one – would you turn back, my dear, And, for the sake of Love’s mysterious dream, As old as Adam and as sweet as Eve, Take me, as I took you, and once more go Towards that goal which none of us have reached? Contesting battles which but prove a loss, The victor vanquished by the wounded one; Teaching each other sacrifice of self, True immolation to the marriage bond; Learning the joys of birth, the woe of death, Leaving in chaos all the hopes of life—Heart-broken, yet with courage pressing on For fame and fortune, artists needing both? Or, would you rather – I will acquiesce— Since we must choose what is, and are grown gray, Stay in life’s desert, watch our setting sun, Calm as those statues in Egyptian sands, Hand clasping hand, with patience and with peace, Wait for a future which contains no past?
~~~
—spring wind with its              train of spoons, kidney-bean shaped              pools, Floridianhumus, cicadas with their             electric appliance hum, cricket pulse of dusk under              the pixilate gold of the trees, fall’s finish, snow’s white              afterlife, death’s breath finishing the monologue Phenomena, The Most Beautiful Girl you              carved the word because you craved the world—
~~~
Harry Whittington: the man accidentally shot by Dick Cheney



Have you ever been in a situation
where somebody you thought was your friend
did something that hurt you very much,
and then they tried to blame it on you,
and then you had a heart attack?
Just wondering.
I thought Jack Abramoff was my buddy—
a small fish with a large chicken.
What a dick.
Why’d he have to remind me of my first wife,
Jacqueline Bouvier-Kennedy-Onassis-Bono-Crowe-Pitt-Degeneres-Federline?
Of course, that speaks volumes to and of itself.
On the other hand, everything tastes like chicken.
And cooked people taste like butter.
I barely touched the clam chowder
but I ate the chicken fried steak.
Then I ate hot beignet and sludgy chicory
and I accidentally drove the hot ‘n’ sporty.
Now I may try the chicken fries.
Why poo’ed vindaloo?
The founding fathers risked life and limb
just so I could trust the kung pao ham.
But the former potions master
spiked my polyjuice with mango juice,
and now I like drinks with chicks in them.
Doesn’t anyone care about my feelings?
All I wanted to do was kill little birds.
Because, you know, that’s fun.
I forget, which one am I banging,
that Plame bitch or the Ambassador to Switzerland?
I’d ask Dick which of the two he’s screwing
but he never answers my emails.
In other news, I’ve been up to my neck in new food intern activity.
The skewers are kind of like hot wings,
except they are made with chicken tenders.
The backwash is kinda long,
but watch the whole thing for the slo-mo matrix-esque finale.
Way cooler than any other stick figure theater.
A barn-raised quail just said
“Bugs Bunny isn’t real.”
Is there no end to the horrors
this shooting will reveal?
~~~
I.
 
Black swollen fruit dangling on a limb
Red forgotten flesh sprayed across the prairie
Parched brown vines creeping over the wall
Yellow winged pollen, invisible enemies
 
Boluses without homesteads, grubs without a voice
Burrowed deeply into this land’s dark, dark heart
Someday, our pods and pupae shall turn in the earth
And burgeon into our motherlode’s bold beauty
 
 
II.
 
We’re a seed on the manure, on the sole of your shoe
We’re the louse trapped in your hank of golden hair
We’re the sliver that haunts beneath your thumbnail
We the church mouse you scorched with a match but lived
 
We’re the package wrapped, return address unknown
We’re the arm lowered again, again, a bloodied reverie
We’ve arrived shoeless, crutchless, tousle-haired, swollen-bellied
We shall inherit this earth’s meek glory, as foretold
 
 
II. (For Leah, my niece)
 
They gave you a title, but you were too proud to wear it
They gave you the paterland, but you were too lazy to farm it
 
Your condo is leaking, but you’re too angry to repair it
Your dress has moth holes, but you’re too sentimental to toss it
 
You’re too bored to play the lute, it hangs on the wall like an ornament
The piano bites you, it’s an eight-legged unfaithful dog
 
Love grows in the garden, but you’re too impudent to tend it
A nice Hakka boy from Ogden, so hardworking, so kind
 
The prayer mat is for prayer, not for catamite nipple-piercing
The Goddess wags her finger at your beautiful wasteland
 
A dream deferred, well, is a dream deferred
 
 
IV. (Janie’s retort, on her fortieth birthday)
 
The same stars come around and around and around
The same sun pecks her heat at the horizon
The same housing tract, the same shopping center
The same blunt haircut: Chinese, Parisian, Babylonion
The same lipstick: red and it comes off on your coffeecup
The same stars come around and around and around
The same sun tarries in the late noon sky
The same word for mom: Ah ma, madre, mere, majka
The same birthbabe: bald, purplish, you slap to make cry
The same stench: mother’s milk, shit and vomit
The same argument between a man and a woman
The same dog, hit by a car, the same escaped canary
The same turkey for Thanksgiving, Christmas and the New Year
The same three-tiered freeway: Istanbul, Tokyo, San Diego
The same hill, the same shanty town, the same lean-to
The same skyscraper: Hong Kong, Singapore, Toledo
The same soup: chicken, though the veggies may vary
The same rice for supper: white, brown or wild
The same stars come around and around and around
The same sun dips her head into the ocean
The same tree in the same poem by the same poet
The same old husband: saggy breasts, baggy thighs
The same blackness whether we sleep or die
 
 
V.
Whoever abandoned her grandmother at the bus stop
Whoever ran in and out the door like a blind wind
   spinning the upside-down prosperity sign right side up again
Whoever lost her virtue    in darkly paneled rooms    with white boys
Whoever prayed for round eyes
   and taped her eyelids in waiting
Whoever wore platform shoes
   blustering taller than her own kind
Whoever sold her yellow gold for Jehovah
Whoever discarded her jade Buddha for Christ
 
 
VI.
Why are you proud, father, entombed with the other woman?
Why are you proud, mother, knitting my shroud in heaven?
Why are you proud, fish, you feed the greedy mourners?
Why are you proud, peonies, your heads are bowed and weighty?
Why are you proud, millennium, the dialect will die with you?
Why are you proud, psalm, hammering yourself into light?
~~~
Can these movements which move themselves
be the substance of my attraction?
Where does this thin green silk come from that covers my body?
Surely any woman wearing such fabrics
would move her body just to feel them touching every part of her.
Yet most of the women frown, or look away, or laugh stiffly.
They are afraid of these materials and these movements
in some way.
The psychologists would say they are afraid of themselves, somehow.
Perhaps awakening too much desire—
that their men could never satisfy?
So they keep themselves laced and buttoned and made up
in hopes that the framework will keep them stiff enough not to feel
the whole register.
In hopes that they will not have to experience that unquenchable
desire for rhythm and contact.
If a snake glided across this floor
most of them would faint or shrink away.
Yet that movement could be their own.
That smooth movement frightens them—
awakening ancestors and relatives to the tips of the arms and toes.
So my bare feet
and my thin green silks
my bells and finger cymbals
offend them—frighten their old-young bodies.
While the men simper and leer—
glad for the vicarious experience and exercise.
They do not realize how I scorn them;
or how I dance for their frightened,
unawakened, sweet
women.
~~~
And now I have another lad!
    No longer need you tell
How all my nights are slow and sad
    For loving you too well.
His ways are not your wicked ways,
    He's not the like of you.
He treads his path of reckoned days,
    A sober man, and true.
They'll never see him in the town,
    Another on his knee.
He'd cut his laden orchards down,
   If that would pleasure me.
He'd give his blood to paint my lips
    If I should wish them red.
He prays to touch my finger-tips
   Or stroke my prideful head.
He never weaves a glinting lie,
    Or brags the hearts he'll keep.
I have forgotten how to sigh—
    Remembered how to sleep.
He's none to kiss away my mind—
    A slower way is his.
Oh, Lord! On reading this, I find
    A silly lot he is.
 
~~~
I hear a book being written, my sister says, or is it a poem?
 
Her eyes are closed.
 
It has a lot of semicolons.
 
 
One sentence or two? she wants to know. Comma? Period.
 
Well, I say, semicolons join and separate.
 
 
Grammar, my sister says, is very interesting.
~~~
I can play songs in my head
Yes I can perfectly replicate
 
(the) full-on
orchestral
every note
(when the lights / do down / in the city)
yet I cannot
 
compose, for example
 
and though when I was young I believed
 
that the fullness meant
I could recreate the sounds
I heard in my head with my mouth
 
I learned through painful iteration
painfully unsatisfactory
 
shameful the rendition
 
so partial
almost unrelated
the qualities are: note tone scale register vocality musicality
incapacity
painfully shy of representation
is there anyone?
 
who is a record player
~~~
One way to erase an island is to inventa second island absolved of all the soundsthe first one ever made. We don’t knowwho concocted this one, where the triggerfishand clowns fade to inky neon dashes undera fisherman’s skiff. A few plastic pontoonsknock around makeshift slips. Dusk coaxesfrom the shore the small, dull chimeof a spoon against a pot. And TV voicesflash slow across a cliff where two pink loversin matching swimwear kiss their glassesat the edge of a blue pool built just low enoughinto the hill so the couple can gaze into the seaand think of infinity. Many, many years ago,a great emperor wiggled his fingerand commanded his army to corral all the lepersin his domain then pack them into a sailing shipto be delivered to the missions on this clusterof verdant volcanic rock. The emperor’s ordersto his captain were clear: if the monks refusedthe ship’s freight, the skipper was to simplydump the whole sick cargo far from any shore.Other incurables followed in lots over time,or trickled in, hiding from nearby tribes,or banished from other lands to live among theselush slopes of mahogany, papaya, and weeds.Two women, Filomena and Josefa, arrivedwithin days of one another. By then, each had lostmost their toes, though they had tenfull fingers between them, each womanwith one hand still intact. No one is surehow it began, but once a week the pairwould knock on the door of the scowlingMadre Clementina to borrow the hospital’sonly guitar, carved from jackfruit and crackedpretty bad along the back. To these women —no big deal, for Filomena once transcribed the early moonlight serenades of the horny friarsin the Royal South for the brats of an Andalusian duke. Josefa was the daughter of a carpenter, a maker of tables to be exact. She learned to play a harana’s tremulous melodies on her mother’s bandurria at the age of three. The pair of outcasts would stifle laughs, thrilled to earn the crusty nun’s grudging Yes, then amble out to low tide and find a flat rock to shareso they could prop the old guitar on both their laps, the one bad wrist of each woman unwrapped to their stumps, pulled for now behind their backs as they looked past the bay toward the violent waters that first carried them here. And they jammed. Filomena with the five deft hammers of her left and Josefa with her right,thick-muscled — both blue-veined and furious, scrubbing from the instrument all those wicked rhythms from Castile to Nowhere on a fragile scrap of furniture that could barely hold its tune. They sat shoulder to shoulder and thigh to thigh, their good hands brushing from time to time. What they couldn’t remember, they made up, and everything they made up disappeared over the lagoon and over the ocean, every note in every run, every lie and desire, every nick and crack in the jackfruit, the fat harmonics plucked from the old nun’s grunts, six taut strandsof gut whose chords skimmed the water like night locusts in bursts of low clouds and which bore everything in front of them and behind,the brine of the women’s necks mixed with the saltof the lagoon, the cliffs, the spoons, the bright nimbus of the West dipping like a noose, the future of pontoons and fake tits, the historyof nifty crowns pried loose of their jewels, the jiggle of a little finger gone still. One way to erase an island is to invent the watersthat surround it. You can name the watersthat will turn all the sounds the island makes into salt.It will teach you to listen to everything you love disappear    ...    or you can invent a song so big it will hold the entire ocean.  Josefa and Filomena rocked in the dark, hip to hip, joined by that third body of wood, which made sure there was nothing left in the unbroken world to possibly make them whole.
~~~
A real one wouldn't need one,
but the one Nathan draws surely does:
four oblongs the size and color of popsicles,
green apple, toasted coconut and grape,
flanked, two per side, by billowing valentine hearts,
in a frame of Scotch tape.
Alive, it could stay off the floor,
for a few unaerodynamic minutes;
thrown as a paper airplane, for one or two more.
Very sensibly, therefore,
our son gave it something, not to keep it apart
from the ground forever, but rather to make safe its descent.
When we ask that imagination discover the limits
of the real
world only slowly,
maybe this is what we meant.
~~~
Art begins with a lie
      The separation is you plus me plus what we make
            Look into lightbulb, blink, sun’s in your eye
I want a rare sky
      vantage point free from misconception
            Art begins with a lie
Nothing to lose, spontaneous rise
      of reflection, paint the picture
            of a lightbulb, or eye the sun
How to fuel the world, then die
      Distance yourself from artfulness
            How? Art begins with a lie
The audience wants to cry
      when the actors are real & passionate
            Look into footlight, then feed back to eye
You fluctuate in an artful body
      You try to imitate the world’s glory
            Art begins with a lie
                  That’s the story, sharp speck in the eye.
~~~
All day they stream past, petitioners
for understanding, accolade, critique.
I read them all, a vast anthology
of jumbled genres on a common theme:
affliction. So I parse, interpret, scan.
I graph dysrhythmias, dysmetrias;
I eavesdrop on caesuras for unsaid
murmurs, gallops, rubs, snaps, flutters, clicks.
The perils of misreading harrow me—
beware the treacheries of metaphor!—
the elephant that squats upon a chest
is not a burning heart or waterbrash.
Just take the imagists. Their heads explode.
St Elmo's fire flashdances on their limbs.
They float, they swim. Knives twist within their flesh.
They're ball-and-chained by lead, filled with concrete.
Butterflies inhabit them. Their pipes
are wrong, and clogged. Their systems freeze and crash.
Invaded, they resist; defenses fail.
What they need, they think, is you to flush
it out of them, whatever it is, doc.
The formalists present minutiae,
in alphabetical enjambed iambs—
pentameter's ten digits, five lub-dubs—
from acne, backpain, catarrh, dandruff, eye-
strain, flatfoot, gas pains, hangnail, itchiness,
the jitters, kinks, lethargies, migraines, nose-
bleeds, obstipation, panics, queasy retch-
ings, styes and tremors, ulcers, vertigo,
to wandering womb, xerosis, yaws and zits.
Free versers, on the other hand, wax Walt
Whitmanic: their barbaric yawps celebrate and sing
incantatory songs of themselves, songs
of the breath as it wheezes and rales through them,
the short breath and long breath, the breath that is moist or dry,
songs of the blood, the thick- and thinness of it, its heat, its turbulence,
songs of the gut, its rippling coils, the dark burden of its secret indulgences,
songs of the muscled limb, inflamed with toil or the languid thrash of love.
Didacticists, of course, will always add
their theories of omission or commission:
slept in a draft, got their feet wet, caught a chill,
forgot their overshoes and oversoul,
ate too little roughage, too much ham,
should have pumped less iron or pumped more,Mea culpa, meus morbus they intone,
certain you'll absolve them back to health.
Narrativists enshrine a fleeting pain
within an epic of chronologyI woke at six—I'm a morning person—brushed my teeth, ate oatmeal with a patof low-fat margarine, the kind that hasthe dancing turkey on the tub, on salefor .99 at Johnnie's, by the time
you tune back in it's afternoon, the pain
has come and gone; they're vacuuming the rug,
the doorbell rings, the kettle's whistling,
you try to interrupt—where did you saythat pain was?—loquacity steamrolls on
through supper, TV, bedtime, dreams, alarm
clock going off at six. Try Tylenol,
you say, your fingers crossed. Call if it's worse.
Then there's the avant garde. The cutting edge.
The text Munchausens off the sizzling page.
Hypoglossalalia muscles in,
between John Cagey silences, the din
and Sturm of wild unsound, unsense.
O, there are stranger dysphasias, Wernicke,
than are dreamt of in your neurologies,
mutant L=A=N=G=U=A=G=Es that cacophone
far off the beaten geographic tongue,
where elephants explode and overshoes
fibrillate with longing—El Dorado,
Shangri-la, Eden, Heaven, Hell—you name it,
it's yours. And that's, of course, the joke. You nod.
You say, "I understand." You really don't.
~~~
I saw the hand of Rasputin
cast in bronze and used as an oversized
paperweight on someone’s desk.
The authentic hand. Smooth as Italian leather.
It was molded from plaster before he was killed.
Bought at an auction in Europe.
She was a collector.
She knew the value of everything.
I wouldn’t like Rasputin’s hand
on my desk, even though it wore the skin
over its fine bones like a soft glove
and healed the tsarevitch.
I wouldn’t like her Samurai sword.
I’m glad I don’t know what I’m worth.
There are days when the whole world
feels like somebody else’s collection.
Even your hands. We walk
in another country and the mist
slowly rises above the lake
like the heaviness we left,
dissolving.
Only it’s not our heaviness.
*
Sometimes, waking, I forget
where I am. The things around me
go on with their old existence
like props in a play, as if the curtain
has just risen on a room in an Italian villa.
It’s not my play.
In the old life there was a photo
of Valentino on my desk.
Agnes Ayers was swooning in his arms,
the Sheik in a rapture of lips
without any words.
Benevolent uncles spoke in a language.
I didn’t know, their fleshy hands,
their anxious eyes smiling
as they patted me gently on the head.
Like watching a silent movie,
when they opened their mouths
like fish under water
I turned off the sound.
All that sweet absence.
*
Once I learned the thirteen principles
of Rabbi Salanter, but I remember
only seven: truth, diligence, honor,
repose, cleanliness, frugality,
and silence. If I collected words
they would have to belong,
like moss or fleas. Things you say
that I can believe in.
Honor reminds me too much of the Samurai.
I like repose. It belongs to this landscape
where even the lizards rest
when we stand still
and look at the wall together.
Naming the things of this world
you begin to own them.
Cyclamen. Mustard.
I can’t manage so many flowers.
But I already know the word for lake in Italian.
*
Gulls wheel over Lago di Como
at sundown on their way south
trying to catch the last warm currents.
Their wings are white, then silver, and then smoke
when the light abandons them
and dusk settles in their feathers.
If you don’t collect things,
it’s easier to move. Easier to stand
on this cliff for another minute
and watch the leaves fall, one by one,
yellow, into the lake.
They belong to the air
for the time they are drifting.
It’s a long way down.
~~~
I want to spend a lot but not all of my years with you.
We’ll talk about kids
                              but make plans to travel.
I will remember your eyes
                              as green when they were gray.
Our dogs will be named For Now and Mostly.
               Sex will be good but next door’s will sound better.
There will be small things.
I will pick up your damp towel from the bed,
                                                            and then I won’t.
I won’t be as hot as I was
                              when I wasn’t yours
and your hairline now so
               untrustworthy.
When we pull up alongside a cattle car
                              and hear the frightened lows,
                              I will silently judge you
                              for not immediately renouncing meat.
You will bring me wine
                              and notice how much I drink.
                                              The garden you plant and I plant
                              is tunneled through by voles,
                                                             the vowels
                                                             we speak aren’t vows,
               but there’s something
                              holding me here, for now,
               like your eyes, which I suppose
                                                             are brown, after all.
~~~
Isn't the moon dark too,  most of the time?  And doesn't the white page  seem unfinished  without the dark stain  of alphabets?  When God demanded light,  he didn't banish darkness.  Instead he invented  ebony and crows  and that small mole  on your left cheekbone.  Or did you mean to ask  "Why are you sad so often?"  Ask the moon.  Ask what it has witnessed.
~~~
at Las Villas, a small Carol City bar with a makeshift stage,
where he spends too much time drinking,
pretending he can learn to play the guitar at forty-five,
become a singer, a musician,
who writes about "Que Difícil Es...."
to live in Spanish in Miami,
a city yet to be translated,
in a restaurant where he has taken us for Cuban food,
where I sit, frozen, unable to make a sound,
where Mother smiles,
all her teeth exposed,
squeezes my hand,
where Mae and Mitzy hide
under the table shielding them from shame
with a blood-red tablecloth,
leaving my mother and me,
pale-faced, trapped by the spotlight shining in our eyes,
making it difficult for us to pretend
we do not know the man in the white suit
pointing to us.
 
~~~
In the other world we use other words, painting
them with water on the desert’s sidewalk under • unwaver
ing / the / sky’s gaze, meant to be eaten up immediate
ly by our nearest star: we know we’re brief, a flash
of the magnesium bulb’s Lichtenberg lace or
in the hardpan land we inhabit, unwilling / it’s /
to unloosen • Edenic ancestry to us, to unearth / un
couth / the • treasure which lies (we believe) like an ocean
of luminous fish with their wayfinder’s lanterned
faces beneath us, sufficiently gilded to wake the dead
 ’s memory of what they no longer own: a form
for the nation-state to take, to write its penal colony’s
penalties upon, or hold, same as we hold our own
souls, which wager against us as soon as they’re able.
~~~
name address date
I cannot remember
an eye for an eye
then and there my
this    is
your    se
cond    ch
ance    to
h i s t o r y
r e p e a t s
i t s s e l f
and a tooth
for a tooth
is a tooth:
~~~
It’s September: I’ve moved into town,
into the attic of an old barn—a big open room I reach
by climbing a ladder that rises through a hole in the floor.
The room is long and high, with windows at each end,
a row of skylights that leak rain, and shake
and chatter in the northeast winds. I sleep beneath
the roof’s steep pitch, my mattress flat on the boards,
looking up at the high ceiling, where morning
diffuses downward in grains of bright dust. 
This was the old painter’s studio.
The light in those famous canvases is still here
—he couldn’t carry it away with him—
though his paintings took away everything else,
opening space with a stroke of blue or yellow.
I think of his violent loves, the stories
they still tell about him here.
But how quiet and alive his paintings were,
how they quiver with the life not yet realized. 
The town is quiet in September.
Sometimes I hear people talking in the street.
Last night someone said they were going to wait for Michael,
and a voice said that Michael had gone home.
I walk the narrow path down to the marsh.
Wind hard in the dunes. Rain as I’m returning,
cutting through twisting streets, past gardens bent
low with rain, their colors a wash of gold. 
I feel the air surround my body, feel it move
between my legs and between each finger,
as I walk, not mastering space, but in it.
And when the clouds open, the sky
suddenly wide and high, no roof of leaves,
it seems there’s nowhere to go but into wind or water.
I climb the narrow stairs that keep turning,
twisting inward until they meet the ceiling,
which opens and I rise through the floor,
released into an openness I never learn to expect. 
At the yellow table I sit and read
an interview with Picasso’s lover, Francoise Gilot,
the only one to leave him and have another life.
She says she was not destroyed by him, as the others were:
“Because I am of the stuff that cannot be destroyed.”
I felt something blow through me then.
Some devouring wind. Surely, then,
I am of the stuff that can be destroyed.
Haven’t I felt it? The breaking of all I was?
Don’t I sit and count my losses,
here in this room where all the life I knew has ended,
so bare with desire I seem to be eating sky? 
That’s how it is here: I’m lonely, sad;
the wind blows along the roof and I can’t sleep.
Rain runs down the walls and streams across the floor,
leaving dirty puddles on the boards.
A yellow table and a cupboard painted blue,
three chairs that don't match, or even balance rightly,
a dented bucket, its metal reflecting darkly
what is, what cannot be taken away.
What’s beautiful here? The whole thing
is beauty, a clarity not in things
but around them, complete. And still, 
I seem to remain, somehow, myself,
to remain at least something, at a loss
to know how much can be taken from me
and leave me only changed, not ruined,
alert in an emptiness so alive
I recognized it as my life. What would be left,
the shape of it then, this life? I said some beauty,
or radiance, an endless space I fall into
or am taken up by, a brightness that holds me,
gathers light in the center of empty space,
like a vision of the life I have not lived.
~~~
Looking at Mapplethorpe’s Polaroids, I learn that he liked shoes and armpit crotch-shots of men and women, both shaved and un’—all giving a good whiff to the camera. But best of all are his pictures of ordinary phones which convey a palpable sense of expectancy as if at any moment, one of the fabulous, laconic nude men strewn about might call. One could pick up the receiver and hear the garbled sound of ancient Greek and Roman voices reveling in the background. But even when silent, the dingy phone is a sex organ—cock asleep in its cradle.
~~~
Orphan in my first years, I early learnt
To make my heart suffice itself, and seek
Support and sympathy in its own depths.
 




Well, read my cheek, and watch my eye, —
    Too strictly school'd are they
One secret of my soul to show,
    One hidden thought betray.
 
I never knew the time my heart
    Look'd freely from my brow;
It once was check'd by timidness,
     'Tis taught by caution now.
 
I live among the cold, the false,
    And I must seem like them;
And such I am, for I am false
   As those I most condemn.
 
I teach my lip its sweetest smile,
    My tongue its softest tone;
I borrow others' likeness, till
    Almost I lose my own.
 
I pass through flattery's gilded sieve,
    Whatever I would say;
In social life, all, like the blind,
    Must learn to feel their way.
 
I check my thoughts like curbed steeds
    That struggle with the rein;
I bid my feelings sleep, like wrecks
    In the unfathom'd main.
 
I hear them speak of love, the deep.
    The true, and mock the name;
Mock at all high and early truth,
    And I too do the same.
 
I hear them tell some touching tale,
    I swallow down the tear;
I hear them name some generous deed,
    And I have learnt to sneer.
 
I hear the spiritual, the kind,
    The pure, but named in mirth;
Till all of good, ay, even hope,
    Seems exiled from our earth.
 
And one fear, withering ridicule,
    Is all that I can dread;
A sword hung by a single hair
    For ever o'er the head.
 
We bow to a most servile faith,
    In a most servile fear;
While none among us dares to say
    What none will choose to hear.
 
And if we dream of loftier thoughts,
    In weakness they are gone;
And indolence and vanity
    Rivet our fetters on.
 
Surely I was not born for this!
    I feel a loftier mood
Of generous impulse, high resolve,
    Steal o'er my solitude!
 
I gaze upon the thousand stars
    That fill the midnight sky;
And wish, so passionately wish,
    A light like theirs on high.
 
I have such eagerness of hope
    To benefit my kind;
And feel as if immortal power
    Were given to my mind.
 
I think on that eternal fame,
    The sun of earthly gloom.
Which makes the gloriousness of death,
    The future of the tomb —
 
That earthly future, the faint sign
    Of a more heavenly one;
— A step, a word, a voice, a look, —
    Alas! my dream is done!
 
And earth, and earth's debasing stain,
    Again is on my soul;
And I am but a nameless part
    Of a most worthless whole.
 
Why write I this? because my heart
    Towards the future springs,
That future where it loves to soar
    On more than eagle wings.
 
The present, it is but a speck
    In that eternal time,
In which my lost hopes find a home,
    My spirit knows its clime.
 
Oh! not myself, — for what am I? —
    The worthless and the weak,
Whose every thought of self should raise
    A blush to burn my cheek.
 
But song has touch’d my lips with fire.
    And made my heart a shrine;
For what, although alloy'd, debased,
    Is in itself divine.
 
I am myself but a vile link
    Amid life's weary chain;
But I have spoken hallow'd words,
    O do not say in vain!
 
My first, my last, my only wish,
    Say will my charmed chords
Wake to the morning light of fame,
    And breathe again my words?
 
Will the young maiden, when her tears
    Alone in moonlight shine —
Tears for the absent and the loved —
    Murmur some song of mine?
 
Will the pale youth by his dim lamp,
    Himself a dying flame,
From many an antique scroll beside,
    Choose that which bears my name?
 
Let music make less terrible
    The silence of the dead;
I care not, so my spirit last
    Long after life has fled.
 
~~~
Ruffs are optional for trebles in Anglican church choirs.
— Wikipedia



Bored in the balcony reading your novel
hoping it will keep me awake — 
religion was always a blind spot — 
with my Sunday headache waiting for the service
to finish so I can retrieve my little chorister,
no god in us but song, while
pale important teenage Sophia
in blue head chorister ribbon,
face dumpy as a Flemish burgomaster,
bosses littler kids and loves
leading them expressionless
in paired rows from the choir stalls,
holding the processional cross high,
shushing and huffily eyeing them
for babyish disregard of cleanly neatness,
my own chorister dripping orts of tissues
she stows in her sleeves for sniffles,
in the choir room struggles
out of her ruff ringed dark brown inside
from years of child chorister sweat, hair oil, dead skin.
Me: Your other ruff was white and clean!
Her: Sophia said it was too big.
She gave me this one instead. I showed her
it was dirty and tight. She said “deal with it.”
~~~
“Being so caught up
  So mastered.”
                                       —Yeats



I was too shy to say anything but Your poems are so beautiful.
What kinds of things, feelings, or ideas inspire you,
I mean, outside the raw experiences of your life?
He turned a strange crosshatched color
as if he stood in a clouded painting, and said, Thanks,
but no other phenomena intrude upon my starlit mind.
 
I see you are wondering what this is all about. Don’t mind
me, I’m talking to myself again. Yes, poetry is nice and often beautiful,
yet it doesn’t beget much attention, money, or even a simple thanks
for placing the best words in the best order. That’s when I forget all about your
incessant demands, and the restless subject leaps the stream in Technicolor—
until the Remembrancer appears and says, Stop this wasteful life.
 Doctor, lawyer, thief. These fancies of yours could cost a life
or worse, two. Meanwhile, he perceives my gifted body upholding my mind
as I’m explaining my stuff on the Unicorn Tapestries, cheeks starting to color,
feathers ruffling, quiet shudders. He shrugs, Your content sounds too beautiful
but I’d like to read it sometime. Okay. He says all the right things, like I love you
Hyacinth Girl. Things get interesting until the sudden blow: Thanks
 
For the memories. What I’ll think seeing his new work in The New Yorker is Thanks
for nothing, asshole, as he drops me for that prolific pastoral life
with his wife upstate. The more I think about it, it all depends upon your
phantom attention. Surely a world embroiders itself in one’s mind
at any moment, words resounding, ardent present clarifyingly beautiful
And beautifully truthful. You know? Here I should put in a lapis color
 
Or a murky midnight blue. Or have the crowd stagger by in a riot of color
pinning down the helpless beast with spears and ritualistic thanks
to their gods. What one really wants to get at is the real, the eternally beautiful
like The White Album or something. That’s what makes one perilous life
worth living. All the brute indifference, humiliation, and failure can put one in the   
             mind
to give up, freak out, kill somebody, heart battered, so mastered. Oh you
 
Wherever I go, on the subway, in my cubicle, at play, in sleep, it’s always you
of the air, overpowering my senses like a Dutch master in one pure color,
its fiction at full speed, walls breaking, a clarity panorama for the mind
hunting for meaning and finding it at last! Now look at all the work I did, and not
            one thanks
Not even flowers. Off you rush to watch him accept another award in that life
We can only dream of. From where you sit it all seems so beautiful
 
And I finally understand you. For that I can’t express enough thanks
As the subject is the best color for me in the difficulty of this lonely life.
It’s always caught up in my mind, what could be more beautiful.
~~~
The last string quartet

(Leoš Janáček and Kamila Stösslová)



She reads romances, she spells poorly, she’s full-breasted,   
broad in the beam, matron in a cloche hat,
bulky knee-length skirt, apron, thick calves, white stockings, Mary Janes.
Her heels go click click on the pavement.
She has those dark Gypsy eyes and the wide laugh.
He loves it when she tosses her head like that.
And here she is in long skirt and embroidered blouse, posing   
by her dwarf ornamental orange tree on the balcony:
high pale forehead, stacked dark hair, heavy jaw, bust cleaving forward like a prow.   
And here she is on holiday with her husband the businessman the perpetual traveller   
with the commanding walk and striped tie and blunt mustache.
“Two decidedly Jewish types,” writes Zdenka Janáčková, J’s wife:
they send her, in the last year of the war,   
bread, butter, eggs, semolina flour, geese   
from the husband’s military contacts.
*
“My dear dark dove,” J calls Kamila, “My little one.”   
*
He has taken dictation from every fountain in Hukvaldy,   
where he was born to endless mumbled rosaries of water.   
He notes the gush and prattle of the Fox’s Well
as the beech tree flashes its sleight of leaf, and fox kits hide in the rocks;   
the public fountain, “a fine of ten crowns
on those who fail to replace the cover”:
and when the cover is replaced
the fountain closes her eyes;
the castle fountain, handsome, broad and brimming, but scuttled into pipes
for manor farm, brewery and slaughterhouse
where the stream blurts out in blood;
and the little well hidden through tall grass at Kazničov,   
springing up through the roots of three lime trees, “Helisov’s Well,”
chants the little girl, and he notes that too, the quavering fall   
of the name; and watches water bugs skitter
and green moss, darkling, at the bottom, and shards of sky.   
*
Bread, butter, eggs, semolina flour, geese.
Kamila knows nothing of music, she worries about her dress   
for the première of Jenůfa in Vienna.
She has two little boys, Rudi and Otto.
Otto the baby swims on her hand
and she leans over him, soft as night, one eyebrow tilted up   
as at a dream of which she is hardly aware.   
*
“She was of medium height, dark, curly-haired like a Gypsy woman,”   
writes Zdenka, “with great, black bulging eyes.
The voice was unpleasant, shrill.”   
*
—That once again he saw “her raven hair, all loose,”
and she was barefoot in the house
and she climbed a ladder to pick apricots from the tree   
and she refused the gift of the knitted silver bag
“And your eye has a strange depth, it’s so deep it doesn’t shine.”   
*
Night leans hugely.
He sleeps alone, in his study, upstairs at the Organ School.   
Zdenka sleeps in their villa across the yard.   
*
He who had scrawled
on his cuffs, on envelope scraps, on market paper, in his little pad,   
robins’ trills, girls’ chatter at the railway station,
fox bark, thrush whistle, hen cackle,
kitten mew, bee hum, “the chord of stalagmites covered with hoarfrost,”   
the airy, bell-like patter of fountain spray,
    scored
    in a notebook
    years before Kamila
    in a notebook
    2 A.M. 24 February 1903
    his daughter’s dying   
    words—
    Olga—
    dying, age 21—
    in a notebook—
    “Now I remember that I’m supposed to die”
    (a little string of quarter notes, B and middle C)—
    “What walks we took on the corso”—“We
    should say so much—”
    He tells her,
    “You are the most beautiful among them,” and she smiles,   
    in his notebook she smiles.
    And, down to a G,
    “Something gets lost so well, no one can find it.”
    In a notebook—
    2:45 A.M. 25 February 1903, Olga,
    her light hair spread across the pillow,
    sighs
    “A-y-a,” two drawn out B’s, scrupulously noted by her father,   
    and in the margin,
    “God be with you, my soul.”   
*
What can be assimilated into song?   
*
The rivers of Lachia: the River Lubina
falls from a ridge of the Radhošť Mountain
into an abyss, to seethe of silver, crash of dark;
the Ondřejnice dabbles through the village of Mĕrkovice,
past mossy banks, shallow, beery-blonde, tepid, where goslings swim
dunking for weeds and bugs; and the River Ostravice   
is the color of steel, and smites the wrist with cold:
and all the Lachian rivers run
through cello depths, horn hurtle, foam-spray of glockenspiel,   
clash of cymbals at the smoky inn
where Sofie Harabisová flies from arm to arm
in the glare, smoke, sweat and stamp of feet:
“Where is the poet Šťastný or Professor Batĕk or Mrs. Marie Jungova now?
Gone, all gone, those who took part
that wild summer night, forty-five years ago!”   
*
Kamila reads romances.
“There’s no love just innocent   
friendship. My husband’s   
away all the time he’s always   
got things to do.”   
*
“Your raven hair—
I write these lines so they’ll be read, and yet unread   
because unanswered.
So it’s like a stone falling into water—”
“You’re the star I look for in evening—”   
“I was your shadow—”   
“Even thoughts become flesh—”
in the fountain bubbling up among the lime tree roots,   
mumbling its prayers over and over, tonguing the stones.   
*
Now after the war, no need
for bread, butter, eggs, semolina flour, geese delivered   
by special connection
and Czechoslovakia is free in the Sinfonietta, in the razzle of brass:
“I’m really
an ordinary woman Your heart would stop   
aching if you saw me more.”
There’s Rudi, there’s Otto,
and her husband always dealing in his antiques.
No we cannot attend the première in Prague no we cannot.   
Now after the war.
For that cold: boil three onions with marjoram and lemon peel   
and drink it like tea with sugar.
Your raven hair.
I was your shadow, when you reached for the apricots.   
*
Gut scrapings: the bow scrapes sunlight from that summer day at the spa at Luhačovice   
where she sat on the grass “like an exhausted little bird”:
“Dear Madam, Accept these few roses as a token”
where she sat on the grass, scrape sunlight   
from the inner petals, scrape the dark from   
her pupil, so deep it doesn’t shine.
Madam:
“Silence goes to sleep under every tree.”   
Under the tilt of her shadowed brow.   
His baby son died those years ago
                                                      and Olga’s hair   
spreads wide across the pillow where she sighs.
He sleeps alone   
it’s like a stone   
falling.   
*
Lullaby,
bee swarms,
gut scraping, fracture, a waltz
falters, the schmaltzy tune with raven hair   
whispers, breaks off, and the hand she lets him   
touch, for the first time, she does not draw away   
the first time, “your little hand,”
in eleven years, under the linden boughs.
“That dark Jewess,” writes Zdenka, “I rather   
liked her at first, but I held my position.   
You know how artists are. They have to be   
handled. I would not                                    
                                                                let him go.”   
*
“These letters were written in fire.”
Zdenka must   
                understand:
                                    Kamila is
the Gypsy girl, Káťa Kabanová, the Vixen, Aljeja,
the little hidden well by the lime trees at Kazničov,   
the military fanfare on the promenade,
trumpet, oboe, piccolo squeal
when the Austrians march out, the Empire crashes, and the country is,   
like the high-wire flute notes, finally, free.
Zdenka must acknowledge this:   
          These letters
                     were written in fire.   
*
By now Kamila’s boys have been stuffed into trousers, stiff collars, and neckties.   
They’ve grown leggy, their faces are plump.
It’s a question of tempi slightly retarded, a vertigo   
the viola suffers, following the violins.
Silence goes to sleep under every tree.
The cello drags
gusts of confetti, repetition, emotion is all
repetition
pulled by twisted horsehair   
out of gut.
My dear dark dove, a form of mourning,
that too is a form   
of repetition.
Why don’t you write.
So when, those last days, she has come   
at last, with little Otto, respectably
to visit the upstairs room he has built and furnished for her
in his summer cottage in Hukvaldy,
furnished according to his dream—
“I want to have the painting of those two cherubs, a writing desk, a communal table,
a comfortable bed, perhaps of brass, a wardrobe with mirrored doors, a marble wash-stand,
and four chairs, each from a different part of the world—”   
   (the question is, what can be assimilated   
   into song)
she peels oranges, makes tea,
they shop in the market and play and walk
and August 8, on the walk up the Babí hůra Hill, Otto gets lost in the woods and ravines—
Something gets lost so well, no one can find it—
and Leoš seeks and seeks the child in drenching rain   
as if searching for his own
son
in the woods and ravines
under the wing of her darkly tilting brow
and returns   
fevered.
In a notebook no one writes, no one scores his cough.   
10 August 1928 J consents to go   
to the hospital in Ostrava
pneumonia—deterioration—sedative
      What walks we took on the corso   
             Something gets lost so well   
      So it’s like a stone
      Silence goes to sleep under every tree   
             I was your shadow   
      I burned your letters but I keep                  
                                                                        the ash
No one scored the sleep rattle in Ostrava
12 August 10 A.M. Sunday Kamila at his side,
a heavy woman who spells poorly, broad in the beam,   
with thick knees and white stockings,
who reads romances,
who will die of cancer
seven years later
at 43
and be buried in the Jewish cemetery in Písek.
       “And I kissed you
       And you are sitting beside me and I am happy and at peace   
       In such a way do the days pass for the angels.”
No one scored the sleep rattle Sunday 12 August.   
Only then, by his order,
Zdenka   
is told
and arrives by train.
                                    These letters were written in fire.
~~~
Osseous, aqueous, cardiac, hepatic—back from bone the echoes stroke, backfrom the halved heart, the lungsthree years of weightlessness have cinched to gills.From a leather chaise, the astronaut's withered legsdangle, as back they come, soundsa beaked percussion hammer startles into shape.The physician cocks his head and taps—exactlyas a splitter halves his slate, the metamorphic rockchisel-shocked, then shocked again, halvedand halved, until a roof appears, black as space.I'm gaining ground, he says, the astronaut,who knows, from space, earth is just a blue-green glow,a pilot light he circled once, lifted, swiftly flownabove the rafters and atmospheres, half himselfand half again some metamorphic click, extinct as memory. I'm gaining ground,he says, and back it comes, his glintof cloud-crossed world: a pilot lightor swaddled leaf, green in the season's infancy.
~~~
Alone it stands in Poesy’s fair land,    A temple by the muses set apart;    A perfect structure of consummate art, By artists builded and by genius planned. Beyond the reach of the apprentice hand,    Beyond the ken of the unturtored heart,    Like a fine carving in a common mart, Only the favored few will understand. A chef-d’oeuvre toiled over with great care,    Yet which the unseeing careless crowd goes by, A plainly set, but well-cut solitaire, An ancient bit of pottery, too rare    To please or hold aught save the special eye, These only with the sonnet can compare.
~~~
There is a strain to read among the hills,
 The old and full of voices — by the sourceOf some free stream, whose gladdening presence fills
 The solitude with sound; for in its courseEven such is thy deep song, that seems a partOf those high scences, a fountain from the heart.Or its calm spirit fitly may be taken
 To the still breast in sunny garden bowers,Where vernal winds each tree’s low tones awaken,
 And bud and bell with changes mark the hours.There let thy thoughts be with me, while the daySinks with a golden and serene decay.Or by some hearth where happy faces meet,
 When night hath hushed the woods, with all their birds,There, from some gentle voice, that lay were sweet
 As antique music, linked with household words;While in pleased murmurs woman’s lip might move,And the raised eye of childhood shine in love.Or where the shadows of dark solemn yews
 Brood silently o’er some lone burial-ground,Thy verse hath power that brightly might diffuse
 A breath, a kindling, as of spring, around;From its own glow of hope and courage high,And steadfast faith’s victorious constancy.True bard and holy! — thou art e’en as one
 Who, by some secret gift of soul or eye,In every spot beneath the smiling sun,
 Sees where the springs of living waters lie;Unseen awhile they sleep — till, touched by thee,Bright healthful waves flow forth, to each glad wanderer free.
~~~
It's often those           who talk a streak on world affairs           and love and peace who seem to love           and peace the least.
~~~
Branches etch the film of iceon the studio window. A crow looks in,hopping and shrieking when I dancein my black tutu, trimmed with silver. The ballet master says, 
~~~
Oh, dear! The Christian virtues will disappear! Nowhere on land or sea Will be room for charity! Nowhere, in field or city, A person to help or pity! Better for them, no doubt, Not to need helping out Of their old miry ditch. But, alas for us, the rich! For we shall lose, you see, Our boasted charity!—  Lose all the pride and joy Of giving the poor employ, And money, and food, and love (And making stock thereof!). Our Christian virtues are gone, With nothing to practise on! It don’t hurt them a bit, For they can’t practise it; But it’s our great joy and pride—  What virtue have we beside? We believe, as sure as we live, That it is more blessed to give Than to want, and waste, and grieve, And occasionally receive! And here are the people pressing  To rob us of our pet blessing! No chance to endow or bedizen A hospital, school or prison, And leave our own proud name To Gratitude and Fame! No chance to do one good deed, To give what we do not need, To leave what we cannot use To those whom we deign to choose! When none want broken meat, How shall our cake be sweet? When none want flannels and coals, How shall we save our souls? Oh, dear! Oh, dear! The Christian virtues will disappear! The poor have their virtues rude,— Meekness and gratitude, Endurance, and respect For us, the world’s elect; Economy, self-denial, Patience in every trial, Self-sacrifice, self-restraint,— Virtues enough for a saint! Virtues enough to bear All this life’s sorrow and care! Virtues by which to rise To a front seat in the skies! How can they turn from this  To common earthly bliss,— Mere clothes, and food, and drink, And leisure to read and think, And art, and beauty, and ease,— There is no crown for these! True, if their gratitude  Were not for fire and food, They might still learn to bless The Lord for their happiness! And, instead of respect for wealth, Might learn from beauty, and health, And freedom in power and pelf, Each man to respect himself! And, instead of scraping and saving, Might learn from using and having That man’s life should be spent In a grand development! But this is petty and small; These are not virtues at all; They do not look as they should; They don’t do us any good! Oh, dear! Oh, dear! Oh, dear! The Christian virtues will disappear!
~~~
One figure is female, the other is male.
Both are contained.
One figure is mythical, the other historical.
To the extent that one can be said to have existed at all, they occupy different millennia, different continents.
But, to the extent that one can be said to have existed at all, both figures are considered Asian—one from Colchis, one from Korea.
To mention the Asianness of the figures creates a “racial marker” in the poem.
This means that the poem can no longer pass as a white poem, that different people can be expected to read the poem, that they can be expected to read the poem in different ways.
To mention the Asianness of the figures is also to mention, by implication, the Asianness of the poet.
Revealing a racial marker in a poem is like revealing a gun in a story or like revealing a nipple in a dance.
After such a revelation, the poem is about race, the story is about the gun, the dance is about the body of the dancer—it is no longer considered a dance at all and is subject to regulation.
Topics that have this gravitational quality of aboutness are known as “hot button” topics, such as race, violence, or sex.
“Hot button” is a marketing term, coined by Walter Kiechel III, in a September 1978 issue of Fortune magazine.
The term evokes laboratory animals and refers to consumer desires that need to be slaked.
The term “hot button” suggests not only the slaking of such desires but also a shock or punishment for having acted on those desires, a deterrent to further actions pursuing such desires, and by extension, a deterrent to desire itself.
Violence and sex are examples of desires and can be satisfied, punished, and deterred.
Race is not usually considered an example of desire.
Both the female and the male figures are able to articulate their desires with an unusual degree of candor and specificity.
Both are responsible for many sexual deaths.
The male figure says, “When anger grips me, I cannot contain myself. Only after I kill something—a person, perhaps an animal, even a chicken—can I calm down.... I am sad that Your Majesty does not love me and terrified when you criticize me. All this turns to anger.” “Your Majesty,” here, refers to the king, his father.
The female figure is never directly quoted, but Pseudo-Apollodorus writes that she casts a spell upon the king her husband so that when he has sex with another woman, he ejaculates wild creatures into the woman’s vagina, thereby killing her. Although the punishment is enacted on the body of the woman, this punishment is meant to deter the king from slaking his desires.
Both figures, royal themselves, are angry at the king, but neither attempts to kill the king—which would be political. Instead they displace this anger onto other unnamed deaths, which are considered sexual but not political.
Both figures have spouses known for strategy, for self-preservation in  politically tumultuous times, times of many unnamed deaths.
Both figures are counterfoils to their strategizing spouses, figures of excessive  desire, requiring containment.
Both containers are wooden.
Both containers are camouflaged with a soft, yielding substance—one with grass, one with fur.
Both containers are ingenious solutions to seemingly intractable problems.
One problem is political. One problem is sexual.
They are both the same problem.
They have the same solution.
The male figure waits in the container for death to come. He waits for eight days. His son will live. This ensures the succession, the frictionless transfer of power.
The female figure waits in the container for the generation of a life. We do not know how long she waits. Her son will die, after waiting in his own wooden container. This ensures the succession, the frictionless transfer of power.
There are many artistic representations of both containers.
The male figure’s container is blockish, unadorned, a household object of standard size and quotidian function. Tourists climb into it and pose for photos, post them online. The cramped position of their bodies generates a combination of horror and glee. This, in turn, creates discomfort, the recognition that horror and glee should not be combined, that such a combination is taboo.
The female figure’s container is customized, lushly contoured. Its contours are excessively articulated to the same degree that her desire is excessively articulated. Artists depict the container in cutaway view, revealing the female figure within, awaiting the wild creature. The abject position of the female figure—on all fours, pressing her genitalia back against the hollow cow’s genitalia—generates a combination of lust and revenge. This, in turn, creates discomfort—the recognition that lust and revenge should not be combined, that wild creatures and female figures should not be combined, that these combinations are taboo.
Hot button topics are taboo because they generate discomfort.
The male figure slakes his violent desires and is punished. The male figure also functions as a hot button, a means whereby the violent desires of tourists  are slaked, while generating discomfort in these tourists.
The female figure slakes her sexual desires and is punished. The female  figure also functions as a hot button, a means whereby the sexual desires of artists are slaked, while generating discomfort in these artists.
The tourist can climb into the rice chest. The tourist can pose for a photo in the rice chest. Then the tourist can climb out of the rice chest and walk away.
The artist can look into the hollow cow. The artist can render the contours of the hollow cow, the contours of the female figure. Then the artist can walk away.
Both containers allow the tourist and artist to touch the hot button, the taboo.
The desire and the discomfort remain contained.
Both containers allow the tourist and the artist to walk away.
The male and female figures remain contained.
Neither container—the rice chest, the hollow cow—appears to have any necessary connection to race.
To mention race where it is not necessary to mention race is taboo.
I have not mentioned the race of the tourist or the artist.
The tourist and the artist are allowed to pass for white.
The tourist and the artist are not contained.
I have already mentioned the race of the poet.
But to the extent that the poet is not contained, the poet is allowed to pass for white.
I have already mentioned the race of the male and female figures.
The male and female figures are contained.
The rice chest and the hollow cow are containers.
The rice chest and the hollow cow are not the only containers in this poem.
Colchis and Korea are containers in this poem.
Asianness is a container in this poem.
Race is a container in this poem.
Each of these containers contains desire and its satisfaction.
Each of these containers contains discomfort and deterrence.
Each of these containers contains a hot button, a taboo.
The tourist and the artist can enter each of these containers.
The tourist and the artist can touch the hot button and walk away.
Each of these containers separates the slaking of desire from the punishment of desire.
Each of these containers is an ingenious solution to a seemingly intractable problem.
They are the same problem.
They have the same solution.
Each of these containers ensures the frictionless transfer of power.
Each of these containers holds a male or female figure.
The name of the male figure can be translated as “Think of me in sadness.”
The name of the female figure can be translated as “I shine for all of you.”
~~~
Then one day she noticed the forest had begun to bleed into her waking life.
There were curved metal plates on the trees to see around corners.
She thought to brush her hand against his thigh.
She thought to trace the seam of his jeans with her thumbnail.
The supersaturated blues were beginning to pixillate around the edges, to
               become a kind of grammar.
She placed a saucer of water under her lamp and counted mosquitoes as
               they drowned.
Soot amassed in drifts in the corners of the room.
She pressed her thumb into the hollow of his throat for a while and then
               let him go.
~~~
           One conversation, one only, remaining:
It will be that give-and-take
With Larry Littlebird — 
Oral listener — 
All about eagles, their shoulders,
Ospreys, their plummet,
And frogs, their singing
Scratched by rain’s soft claws.           But any of these exchanges will do:
Charlie saying, If you can hum
It you can play it, if you can play at all.
And if not, sing with closed lips to yourself.
Low continuous sound, your refrigerator.
You must not be lonely.
Harold says someone pointed out
Being begins with a hum:
It seems what you are,
You’re happy hearing it, I’m happy for you,
For each other, happy.
Hear it in your colloquial throat,
The syllable meaning human.           Or, if not any of these intercourses, then
Jenny and Chloe, who with a shake
And a nod and a wave of an arm
Toward the East say, We are going
And we’ll go on your behalf
And we’ll carry signs and shout
The last best protest. Cerise and fuchsia
Sisters, ears pointing out.           Or my street signs:
Calaveras (our skull’s tacit mouth) and Eisenhower — War, a theft from those who hungerAnd are not fed. Not a way of life at all.
Crossed words on a corner pole.
Movers pack me up, extract me
From that conversation.           I’ve heard a few words — they stay with me,
An earned ear — and yet
Too brief for brooding. Ghost
Of my father, who never said much
But Smell the roses for the camera;
Or when I ask, Can I retire?
He quickly says, Don’t hesitate!
Any of these exchanges will do,
“Now is the perfect time.”
Not “For what?” but stopping it open.
“April Fool,” said my favorite Eleanor,
And then she died. “Good night,” her son
Tipped his hat at me,
From the top of the stairs, and then he tumbled.
“I love you,” I contributed.
And then I buttoned up.
~~~
In every life there’s a moment or twowhen the self disappears, the cruel woundtakes over, and then againat times we are filled with skyor with birds orsimply with the sugary tea on the tablesaid the old womanI know what you mean said the tulipabout epiphaniesfor instance a cloudless April skythe approach of a butterflybut as to the disappearing selfnoI have not yet experienced thatYou are creating distinctionsthat do not exist in realitywhere “self” and “not-self” are like saltin ocean, cloud in skyoxygen in firesaid the philosophical dogunder the table scratching his balls
~~~
I sit in my own shadow, she says, the way my mother gave birth to it. In artificial light, blinds drawn against the darkness of power.  I think of you as if you were that shadow, a natural enclosure, a world, not a slight, so I can wander through your darkness. Has our contract inverted time, made our universe contract, a cramped bed for two? And when I say your name, do I draw water, a portrait, curtain, bridge, or conclusion?
Place there is none, he quotes. Not even to hang up our archetypes. Let alone Star-Spangled Banners. We go forward and backward, and there is no place. Therefore it is a name for God. My eye, steadfast on traffic lights, abolishes the larger part of the round world. I should look at my feet. Space sweeps through us, a hell of distances bathed in the feeble glow of emptiness. Outward mobility, unimpeded. Suddenly we’re nobody home, without any need of inattention, imposture, or talent for deceit.
The wind whips my skin as if it were water, she says. My skin is water. For wind read wind, news, sky falling. Is it a mental disturbance or the higher math of love if I hear you talking under my breath and from the torn fragments assume the sun is far away and small, and a look can cause a burn? Superstition, too, is a kind of understanding, and to forgo it may have consequences.
Clusters of possibilities whiz through our head, he says. Electric charges, clogged highway, screeching brakes, a house too full of guests. With grounds for disagreement and miscarriage. The light rushes in dry, screaming. But the opaque parts of the nerve oppose the noise and void the options. Then the project must be prolonged in terms of lack.
~~~
Round and round they go
             with a ribbon and garlanded
                           flowers in hand.
The bark won't unravel,
             the tree spells solidness—we
                            grand, oaken, elmed selves
of the ancients. Our pith
            is clean. There's no pining
                          away for tomorrow, we are
in current respiration,
            we move with the wind.
                          Singular, we are
stunning. In horde,
              we are dense, differing
                            dream. The autumnal
flashiness these days
             is drought-determined.
                          We barely go beyond
the red. Our hollows
              are never vacant. We live
                             to board; we take
the ax. Marbled inside
             the original stem. We were
                          born we don't know when.
 
~~~
You give me a little courage, Mary,
in your skittish dedication to her highness;
I too can dare as humbleness may dare;
if there’s anywhere to speak with you, it’s here
at the wordy Anglo-Saxon periphery
of the universe’s one great surge of praise
 
though I’m lost here. Where’s the joyful noise?
the syllables I managed to memorize
before they were weighted down by meaning?
and what’s all this complicated rhyme?
Don’t mistake me—I’m not complaining;
it’s just not my notion of a psalm
 
for all my love of wrought, elaborate things—
especially when they’re the sort that sings
and yours do sing a stunning song—
but they’re off-kilter without the awe
inherent in my ancient holy tongue.
I miss my amen sela, hallelujah
 
though I do applaud you and your brother—
going for the full linguistic bait-and-switch
in the move from one language to another:
David’s disarmingly direct speech
a tour-de-force of formal contrivance
(no form repeated more than once
 
in each of a hundred fifty psalms!)
in your show-off/virtuoso hands.
Talk about such a song in such a land—
but what else is there in dreary England?
Its sole extravagance a trove of synonyms
that endlessly perplexes and expands
 
its mongrel, unbeautiful tongue—
a language, frankly, crying out for poetry
given its absence, even, of integrity
not to mention intrinsic song. . . .
(Its sound: water going down the drain
according to my friend, an Italian,
 
after riding in a compartment of Americans
gurgling all the way from Florence to Rome.)
Why not a convoluted scheme
of intricately wrought meter and rhyme?
So what if the Hebrew has no strict patterns?
Aim for a parallel sublime;
 
aren’t poems for the impossible?
Though perhaps yours wouldn’t have been written
had you known how daunting their task was;
you had no Hebrew, used the Coverdale,
Wyatt, Geneva Bible, as cribs for Latin,
even psaumes de David, mis en rime Françoise . . .
 
Clearly, your secret weapon was ignorance,
also useful (look at me!) in writing a poem,
your psalms fourth- and fifth-hand half the time.
Unless (of course!) your stroke of brilliance
was to focus on the one thing you could do:Sing and let your song be new 
which they are, profoundly, even to me,
who know so many bits of the originals
of what you claim you’re “translating” by heart.
Still, I’ll be reading along, alternately
put off and spellbound by your art-
ifice, when my wary eye suddenly falls
 
on something both completely known and new,
my own—our own—ungainly language
for a brief instant alien with grace,
a black-on-white typescript mirage
in which English letters turn into Hebrew
or at least intercept its holiness. . . .
 
How did you manage it, Mary?
Your contemporaries called it piety—
but I don’t believe that for a second.
What motivated you was love of poetry,
or rather of your legendary
brother—lost so young—whom you would spend
 
your whole life working to immortalize. . . .
I’m not sure he needed you. No lighter touch
exists in English poetry than his . . .
a touch you often managed to approach
in your grief-induced lyric resolve
to force a bit of him to stay alive.
 
Poetry as solace, as wizardry—
and there he is, with you, all the time,
clearly palpable in all your artistry.
It was your eagerness to be with him
that kept you going back to intervene
with yet one more indomitable line,
 
got you through all hundred-fifty psalms.
Or maybe it was just your poet’s ruse
(poetry often thrives on self-delusion)
to trick yourself to rise to his occasion. . . .
Unless he just provided the excuse
to stake your own (quite vast) poetic claims,
 
impossible to say from this vantage point:
to distinguish collaborator from muse,
self-doubt from false humility
but, then again, there’s a poetry in mystery.
Who will contradict me if I confuse
my own passions with yours—so convenient,
 
inevitable?—in a poem like this—
though you and I—despite the labyrinth
of misapprehension, class, religion
reinforcing our dissociation
(Jew from Christian, commoner from countess,
twenty-first-century from seventeenth)
 
come together in passion upon passion
(forgive me, Mary, if dare too far):
psalms, poetic forms, your genius brother
(I mean both the poet and the man;
no poem could manufacture that much charm).
We’ve even suffered from a kindred harm:
 
my version, albeit, fairly mild,
though I too was admonished as a child
about what a woman dared not do.
Still, I have a vast cohort, while you
were almost entirely alone.
Better yet, I had the complete Dickinson
 
(published just a year before I was born);
I didn’t know it yet, but I had you . . .
while you had to ransack antiquity
for even fragments of poems by a woman.
But of course you weren’t troubled by inequity—
it was, frankly, all you knew—
 
you might even have relished your position
as sole woman poet, thinker, patron—
lonely as it was—though you did encourage
your precocious niece, Mary (later Wroth).
And who can really estimate the damage
of your appalling bargain: a brother’s death
 
required to turn you into poet?
Of course, in your time, death was everywhere.
Perhaps you were pious—a last resort
to shore up an attenuated heart
against even further disrepair,
immersion in the psalms a sort of antidote
 
to life’s massive overdose of pain:
from living with a sad, disfigured mother
(small-pox scars from nursing a sick queen)
mourning her husband’s lost affection
to deaths of favorites—your sister, your brother,
your only daughters, Katherine, then Anne.
 God made this day; he did us send itIn joy and mirth then let us spend it
Excellent advice, if it would hold—
And maybe it does, when you can summonall that air or life enfold
to distract you with a binge of exaltation . . . 
or if that fails, then an assiduous
extravaganza of sublime detail
calibrated to provide the wherewithal
to face a universe we cannot alter
if not with joy and mirth, at least with grace:
a perfect, hand-illuminated psalter, 
the loops of all its letters filled with gold—
a treasure, even, for an exacting Queen—
offering a deity who’ll listen
to a voice alternately humble, bold,
beseeching, thankful, ecstatic, bleak,
through which (hallelujah, Mary!) you still speak.
~~~
The farmer in the dellThe farmer in the dellOx chip gastrologyThe farmer in the dellThe farmer takes a wifeThe farmer takes a wifePupa reconnaissanceThe farmer takes a wifeThe wife takes a childThe wife takes a childSweetbread electrolyteThe wife takes a childThe child takes a nurseThe child takes a nurseCheese futz habitualThe child takes a nurseThe nurse takes a cowThe nurse takes a cowFlatworm collateralThe nurse takes a cow  
~~~
For my father



I think by now the river must be thick
        with salmon. Late August, I imagine it
as it was that morning: drizzle needling
        the surface, mist at the banks like a net
settling around us — everything damp
        and shining. That morning, awkward
and heavy in our hip waders, we stalked
        into the current and found our places —
you upstream a few yards and out
        far deeper. You must remember how
the river seeped in over your boots
        and you grew heavier with that defeat.
All day I kept turning to watch you, how
        first you mimed our guide's casting
then cast your invisible line, slicing the sky
        between us; and later, rod in hand, how
you tried — again and again — to find
        that perfect arc, flight of an insect
skimming the river's surface. Perhaps
        you recall I cast my line and reeled in
two small trout we could not keep.
        Because I had to release them, I confess,
I thought about the past — working
        the hooks loose, the fish writhing
in my hands, each one slipping away
        before I could let go. I can tell you now
that I tried to take it all in, record it
        for an elegy I'd write — one day —
when the time came. Your daughter,
        I was that ruthless. What does it matter
if I tell you I learned to be? You kept casting
        your line, and when it did not come back
empty, it was tangled with mine. Some nights,
        dreaming, I step again into the small boat
that carried us out and watch the bank receding —
        my back to where I know we are headed.
~~~
why am i doing this? Failure
to keep my work in order so as
to be able to find things
to paint the house
to earn enough money to live on
to reorganize the house so as
to be able to paint the house &
to be able to find things and
earn enough money so as
to be able to put books together
to publish works and books
to have time
to answer mail & phone calls
to wash the windows
to make the kitchen better to work in
to have the money to buy a simple radio
to listen to while working in the kitchen
to know enough to do grownups work in the world
to transcend my attitude
to an enforced poverty
to be able to expect my checks
to arrive on time in the mail
to not always expect that they will not
to forget my mother's attitudes on humility or
to continue
to assume them without suffering
to forget how my mother taunted my father
about money, my sister about i cant say it
failure to forget mother and father enough
to be older, to forget them
to forget my obsessive uncle
to remember them some other way
to remember their bigotry accurately
to cease to dream about lions which always is
to dream about them, I put my hand in the lion's mouth
to assuage its anger, this is not a failure
to notice that's how they were; failure
to repot the plants
to be neat
to create & maintain clear surfaces
to let a couch or a chair be a place for sitting down
and not a table
to let a table be a place for eating & not a desk
to listen to more popular music
to learn the lyrics
to not need money so as
to be able to write all the time
to not have to pay rent, con ed or telephone bills
to forget parents' and uncle's early deaths so as
to be free of expecting care; failure
to love objects
to find them valuable in any way; failure
to preserve objects
to buy them and
to now let them fall by the wayside; failure
to think of poems as objects
to think of the body as an object; failure
to believe; failure
to know nothing; failure
to know everything; failure
to remember how to spell failure; failure
to believe the dictionary & that there is anything
to teach; failure
to teach properly; failure
to believe in teaching
to just think that everybody knows everything
which is not my failure; I know everyone does; failure
to see not everyone believes this knowing and
to think we cannot last till the success of knowing
to wash all the dishes only takes ten minutes
to write a thousand poems in an hour
to do an epic, open the unwashed window
to let in you know who and
to spirit thoughts and poems away from concerns
to just let us know, we will
to paint your ceilings & walls for free
~~~
National Portrait Gallery



I have a need to see the painting when no one is looking. The god-
thought if there was such a thing, inconsolable, of Saturday
reaching for Sunday to ride out onto the Indian Ocean like
an argument of starched waves in their coffin-white lace I might
finger as I pass. There are hands in the paintings: raised, pointing,
folded, reaching, reaching    ...    there’s a leporello book intended for
my ex-lover’s breathing, weather balloons like colored severed heads
laughing their way up the sky’s fever-continuing threshold of three
miles withholding this formula for desire. Beside the one body and its
skying figures of speech, night’s impressionist-flecked mask captured
by singing: try to inhale. And again, please. Cough up cadmium twice,
suddenly. Carry the caraway seed page away, fill your sea purse head
with the tiny unborn. Painting, like digging up your garden in the dark,
isn’t spring. Isn’t daddy root, mama bud pullulating for some creation.
Isn’t spring. Isn’t season’s salt measure for your worth. Whoever
told you that lied about what’s to be framed next.
~~~
April fool
Bear's-foot
Bog-onion
Devil's-apple
Dog parsley
Doll's-eyes
Fairy hells
Flying saucers
Four o'clock
Gagweed
Goosefoot
Hare's-ear
Indian beans
Inkweed
Jacob's-coat
Lady's-thumb
Lion's-beard
Locoweed
Monkey-fiddle
Moonseed
Mother-in-law
Puncture-vine
Naked lady
Quaker-bonnets
Rabbit-bush
Smartweed
Sneezeweed
Snakegrass
Stinking Willie
Sundials
Swallow-wort
Wahoo
Wart-cress
Witches' thimbles
Wolfsbane
Wonder berry
~~~
Water spurts incredibly
Clear up under simple feel
And that is how
We drank water
 
A loon fled
Into water
Because a raven
Could not dive
Or swim. Only spinning is a star
Dizziness       simple
Ceremony appeasing weather
With you sky, with for you sky
Between
A feeling a sky
Heartfelt redolent in June
Roses fume. May day
Perpetual field of velvet horizon
At a slant is the unicorn’s mane
Realization from seed to flower
We made contact chalices
Filled, a sticky sweet
Rim
 
Oenone in layers tissue white
Garb blooming staunchly
Against salt caking waves
Tosses the self
Secret she has into the sea
A volume into silence
Liquid shadow engulfing liquid
Ruin. Dumbess as condition
Obsolete
In generalization
Sea flowers join
Her hair. A music hummed
In the mind otherwise mute
In sedge hats we walk along pulling
Iris and water oats for our vases
 
Lysistrata’s cool
Logical edge
Lance leaved
Golden
Rod
Linear leaves
Untoothed edges
 
Note the fringed beards
And the relatively short
Spurs on this deep yellow
Orange species. Spur
Shorter than that deeply
Fringed lip. Sepals rounded
And curved inward. Thickets
Boys
~~~
Before balance, before counting, before
The record glistens and the needle slides,
Grating, into the overture, there is the end
Of weight, the leaning into nothing and then
A caught breath, the record listens, the needle slides
Over slowly, and all at once around us a woman’s voice
Stretches weightless, leaning into nothing.
Like a clothesline, the taut chorus: oh, hilarious
Oh baby, all around us, over slowly, a woman’s voice
Gathers above the pick me up, pick me up
And the desperate put, put me down. First the tightrope,
Then the light foot, and the taunting chorus
Pick me up, pick me up. Oh, oh baby.
The slippery floor shimmers and spins like a record while
The light is swinging footloose on its rope
Out of time. The shadows
Slip, shimmering black, and spin across the floor,
Then turn back and pick up again. Oh seedpod stuck for just
One moment on the cattail, out of time, out of shadows,
Downy cheek against a beard: oh scratches
On the record, oh baby, oh measure
Oh strange balance that grips us
On this side of the world.
~~~
There may be pink with white or white with rose
Or there may be white with rose and pink with mauve
Or even there may be white with yellow and yellow with blue
Or even if even it is rose with white and blue
And so there is no yellow there but by accident.
~~~
for Lewis Ellingham

The laughing soldiers fought to their defeat . . .
James Fenton, “In a Notebook”



White decorators interested in Art,
Black file clerks with theatrical ambitions,
kids making pharmaceutical revisions
in journals Comp. instructors urged they start,
the part-Cherokee teenage genius (maybe),
the secretary who hung out with fairies,
the copywriter wanting to know, where is
my husband? the soprano with the baby,
all drank draft beer or lethal sweet Manhattans
or improvised concoctions with tequila
in summer when, from Third Street, we could feel a   
night breeze waft in whose fragrances were Latin.
The place was run by Polish refugees:
squat Margie, gaunt Speedy (whose sobriquet
transliterated what?). He’d brought his play
from Łódź. After a while, we guessed Margie’s
illiteracy was why he cashed checks
and she perched near the threshold to ban pros,
the underage, the fugitive, and those
arrayed impertinently to their sex.
The bar was talk and cruising; in the back
room, we danced: Martha and the Vandellas,
Smokey and the Miracles, while sellers
and buyers changed crisp tens for smoke and smack.
Some came in after work, some after supper,
plumage replenished to meet who knew who.
Behind the bar, Margie dished up beef stew.
On weeknights, you could always find an upper
to speed you to your desk, and drink till four.
Loosened by booze, we drifted, on the ripples
of Motown, home in new couples, or triples,
were back at dusk, with IDs, at the door.
Bill was my roommate, Russell drank with me,
although they were a dozen years my seniors.
I walked off with the eighteen-year-old genius
—an Older Woman, barely twenty-three.
Link was new as Rimbaud, and better looking,
North Beach bar paideon of doomed Jack Spicer,
like Russell, our two-meter artificer,
a Corvo whose ecclesia was cooking.
Bill and Russell were painters. Bill had been
a monk in Kyoto. Stoned, we sketched together,
till he discovered poppers and black leather
and Zen consented to new discipline.
We shared my Sixth Street flat with a morose
cat, an arch cat, and pot plants we pruned daily.
His boyfriend had left him for an Israeli
dancer; my husband was on Mykonos.
Russell loved Harold, who was Black and bad,
and lavished on him dinners “meant for men”
like Escoffier and Brillat-Savarin.
Staunch blond Dora made rice. When she had
tucked in the twins, six flights of tenement
stairs they’d descend, elevenish, and stroll
down Third Street, desultory night patrol
gone mauve and green under the virulent   
streetlights, to the bar, where Bill and I
(if we’d not come to dinner), Link, and Lew,
and Betty had already had a few.
One sweat-soaked night in pitiless July,
wedged on booth benches of cracked Naugahyde,
we planned a literary magazine
where North Beach met the Lower East Side Scene.
We could have titled it When Worlds Collide.
Dora was gone, “In case the children wake up.”
Link lightly had decamped with someone else
(the German engineer? Or was he Bill’s?).
Russell’s stooped vale brushed my absent makeup.
Armed children spared us home, our good-night hugslaissez-passer. We railed against the war.
Soon, some of us bused south with SNCC and CORE.
Soon, some of us got busted dealing drugs.
The file clerks took exams and forged ahead.
The decorators’ kitchens blazed persimmon.
The secretary started kissing women,
and so did I, and my three friends are dead.
~~~
They shut me up in Prose –
As when a little Girl
They put me in the Closet –
Because they liked me “still”   –
Still! Could themself have peeped –
And seen my Brain – go round –
They might as wise have lodged a Bird
For Treason – in the Pound –
Himself has but to will
And easy as a Star
Look down opon Captivity –
And laugh – No more have I –
~~~
I had a little Sorrow,
   Born of a little Sin,I found a room all damp with gloom
   And shut us all within;And, "Little Sorrow, weep," said I,"And, Little Sin, pray God to die,And I upon the floor will lie
   And think how bad I've been!"Alas for pious planning —
   It mattered not a whit!As far as gloom went in that room,
   The lamp might have been lit!My Little Sorrow would not weep,My Little Sin would go to sleep —To save my soul I could not keep
   My graceless mind on it!So up I got in anger,
   And took a book I had,And put a ribbon on my hair
   To please a passing lad.And, "One thing there's no getting by —I've been a wicked girl," said I;"But if I can't be sorry, why,
   I might as well be glad!"
~~~
Lavenderish dusk
strapped for stays,
pomegranates under the rubberband
chucked for a glass Oz,
 
letdown
splayed by the pillar-shelves
to page upon the Ottoman:
 
his talk has wrought suit
amid citrus gapes
and pall dunked in the bowl
and grated sage
or cleaved clear paleo-pines.
 
Postgeist, upcast
California upon weed,
what banker yields
so fragrant a cant
as this vagrant cant?
~~~
I am happy living simply:like a clock, or a calendar.Worldly pilgrim, thin,wise—as any creature. To knowthe spirit is my beloved. To come to things—swiftas a ray of light, or a look.To live as I write: spare—the wayGod asks me—and friends do not.1919
~~~
It was like climbing a mountain to those of us who’d climbed one. To the others, it was like, I suppose, something else. In other words, we let  everybody find her own figure of speech.
Not that it—speech—lay thick on the ground, or mountain; it presented itself one word at a time, far between. A body had to keep an eye out, like for firewood at dusk, or else
miss her chance. Nobody else, let’s face it, cared about metaphor, or even simile, the like-it-or-not-ness of the mountain pretty much getting  between a body and her musing, in its going. One
step at a time, anyone could lose herself or someone else just staring at her feet. And if a body meet a body is not mere speech but something that could happen, like hopping a bus—though on the mountain
you’ll catch no rides, worse luck, the mountain requires to be climbed on foot, one after the other, nothing else will get you up it. There’s nothing like such obduracy but in the wild, nobody can tell you otherwise. No simple figure,
this struggle: just a crag, your burden, and your own two feet. Say  otherwise, talk through your hat, which I don’t care for.
~~~
If an orchidophage’s tastebud magniﬁed resembles an orchidso my buds indubitably mimic pricking ice cream cones.Love, little by little it dawned on us the artisanalice cream, especially the prizewinning caramel, would be out of our reach, like the previous Friday of a Sunday leaving the beach, in the meltdown.When you gasp at the soundﬁle of cymbals
~~~
This is a demon that can take a grown brain and squash it to sponge. There is no loving the state
of a decrepit mind that encourages a decrepit body. Is he sleeping or just not there? States of
awareness flicker inside a gauzy lens. We’ve seen this before—in a film, the man disappearing
as he stands right there, his body stolid.
 
Let’s say this man worked as an Assistant Principal and admired his own IQ.
Let’s say this man had a brutish body but was not a brute. All of this becomes portraiture but
there can be fractures of truth.  Looking at him you think: Am I in this film or is this a vapory
memory?
~~~
It would not sound so deep
Were it a Firmamental Product—
Airs no Oceans keep—
—Emily Dickinson



Afloat between your lens   
and your gaze,   
the last consideration to go   
across my gray matter   
and its salubrious   
deliquescence   
is   
whether or not I’ll swim,   
whether I’ll be able to breathe,   
whether I’ll live like before.   
I’m caught in the bubble   
of your breath.   
It locks me in.   
Drives me mad.   
Confined to speak alone,   
I talk and listen,   
ask questions and answer myself.   
I hum, I think I sing,   
I breathe in, breathe in and don’t explode.   
I’m no one.   
Behind the wall   
of hydrogen and oxygen,   
very clear, almost illuminated,   
you allow me to think   
that the Root of the Wind is Water
and the atmosphere   
smells of salt and microbes and intimacy.
And in that instant comes   
the low echo   
of a beyond beyond,   
a language archaic and soaked   
in syllables and accents suited   
for re-de-trans-forming,   
giving light,   
giving birth to   
melanin   
hidden within another skin:   
the hollow echo of the voice   
which speaks alone.   
~~~
                    I drew solitude over me, on the long shore.
                                        —Robinson Jeffers, “Prelude”  

          For whoever does not afflict his soul through this day, shall be
          cut off from his people.
                                                                           —Leviticus 23:29




What is a Jew in solitude?
What would it mean not to feel lonely or afraid
far from your own or those you have called your own?
What is a woman in solitude:   a queer woman or man?
In the empty street, on the empty beach, in the desert
what in this world as it is can solitude mean?
 
The glassy, concrete octagon suspended from the cliffs
with its electric gate, its perfected privacy
is not what I mean
the pick-up with a gun parked at a turn-out in Utah or the Golan Heights
is not what I mean
the poet’s tower facing the western ocean, acres of forest planted to the east, the woman reading in the cabin, her attack dog suddenly risen
is not what I mean
 
Three thousand miles from what I once called home
I open a book searching for some lines I remember
about flowers, something to bind me to this coast as lilacs in the dooryard once
bound me back there—yes, lupines on a burnt mountainside,
something that bloomed and faded and was written down
in the poet’s book, forever:
Opening the poet’s book
I find the hatred in the poet’s heart: . . . the hateful-eyedand human-bodied are all about me: you that love multitude may have them
 
Robinson Jeffers, multitude
is the blur flung by distinct forms against these landward valleys
and the farms that run down to the sea; the lupines
are multitude, and the torched poppies, the grey Pacific unrolling its scrolls of surf,
and the separate persons, stooped
over sewing machines in denim dust, bent under the shattering skies of harvest
who sleep by shifts in never-empty beds have their various dreams
Hands that pick, pack, steam, stitch, strip, stuff, shell, scrape, scour, belong to a brain like no other
Must I argue the love of multitude in the blur or defend
a solitude of barbed-wire and searchlights, the survivalist’s final solution, have I a choice?
 
To wonder far from your own or those you have called your own
to hear strangeness calling you from far away
and walk in that direction, long and far, not calculating risk
to go to meet the Stranger without fear or weapon, protection nowhere on your mind
(the Jew on the icy, rutted road on Christmas Eve prays for another Jew
the woman in the ungainly twisting shadows of the street:   Make those be a woman’s footsteps; as if she could believe in a woman’s god)
 
Find someone like yourself.   Find others.
Agree you will never desert each other.
Understand that any rift among you
means power to those who want to do you in.
Close to the center, safety; toward the edges, danger.
But I have a nightmare to tell:   I am trying to say
that to be with my people is my dearest wish
but that I also love strangers
that I crave separateness
I hear myself stuttering these words
to my worst friends and my best enemies
who watch for my mistakes in grammar
my mistakes in love.
This is the day of atonement; but do my people forgive me?
If a cloud knew loneliness and fear, I would be that cloud.
 
To love the Stranger, to love solitude—am I writing merely about privilege
about drifting from the center, drawn to edges,
a privilege we can’t afford in the world that is,
who are hated as being of our kind: faggot kicked into the icy river, woman dragged from her stalled car
into the mist-struck mountains, used and hacked to death
young scholar shot at the university gates on a summer evening walk, his prizes and studies nothing, nothing availing his Blackness
Jew deluded that she’s escaped the tribe, the laws of her exclusion, the men too holy to touch her hand;   Jew who has turned her back
on midrash and mitzvah (yet wears the chai on a thong between her breasts) hiking alone
found with a swastika carved in her back at the foot of the cliffs (did she die as queer or as Jew?)
 
Solitude, O taboo, endangered species
on the mist-struck spur of the mountain, I want a gun to defend you
In the desert, on the deserted street, I want what I can’t have:
your elder sister, Justice, her great peasant’s hand outspread
her eye, half-hooded, sharp and true 
 
And I ask myself, have I thrown courage away?
have I traded off something I don’t name?
To what extreme will I go to meet the extremist?
What will I do to defend my want or anyone’s want to search for her spirit-vision
far from the protection of those she has called her own?
Will I find O solitude
your plumes, your breasts, your hair
against my face, as in childhood, your voice like the mockingbird’s
singing Yes, you are loved, why else this song?
in the old places, anywhere?
 
What is a Jew in solitude?
What is a woman in solitude, a queer woman or man?
When the winter flood-tides wrench the tower from the rock, crumble the prophet’s headland, and the farms slide into the sea
when leviathan is endangered and Jonah becomes revenger
when center and edges are crushed together, the extremities crushed together on which the world was founded
when our souls crash together, Arab and Jew, howling our loneliness within the tribes
when the refugee child and the exile’s child re-open the blasted and forbidden city
when we who refuse to be women and men as women and men are chartered, tell our stories of solitude spent in multitude
in that world as it may be, newborn and haunted, what will solitude mean?
 
1984-1985
~~~
the ideal city building itself in his brain.
Is this mile magnificent? He’s lived here
 
a while, but the mile feels unreal. Robinson’s
training himself to act blasé. Do museums
 
amuse me? Yes, but not today. Would he
like to be in one? Of course. Why not?
 
An object of value with canvas wings,
an unchanging face in a gilt frame, arranged—
 
thoughtless, guilt-free, & preserved
for eternity. Robinson doesn’t want to be
 
exceptional. He knows he is. He wants to beperceived exceptional. Trains plunge by, steam 
rising from the grates. Sing, muse! of a man
ill-met at the Met. A man on his lunch break, 
heading for a heartbreak, a break-up with Time.
A break-up with time? Feeling filled with ice, 
the way you chill a glass, Robinson passes
the National Academy. He craves a sense 
of belonging, not to always be longing. To be
standing in a doorway, incredibly kissable, 
not waiting at the four-way, eminently missable.
Is this mile magnanimous? He wants it 
unanimous: that this is his kind of town—
up & down & including Brooklyn. The sky 
is clearing, but the isolation sticks.
Robinson’s not sure what a camera obscura 
is for, but he thinks he should have
his portrait done with one. Faces 
blur by as he heads toward the Frick.
Something used to photograph the obscure.
~~~
Live jazz at El Fresco is one guy, electric plinks, until he turns off the switch, closes his eyes,and warbles a boy’s tenor, wood-flute tones, pure séance hymns from before Christians.Rowdies at the bar stop fighting and stare as seawater washes through the room,seeping through floorboards to serpent dens. The chorus stirs spirits from family lore.Desmond, Big Miller, James MackGehee— all rise from steerage and sing with the lords.Next performance is a poet reciting,“The Luck of the Irish,” blue eyes snapping:“Once I journeyed to the Cliffs of Moher.” I follow him to a rocky precipice, pause,then jump to dizzy foam tides below, fall, keep falling into this slow, heartbreaking solo.
~~~
Various stars. Various kings.
Various sunsets, signs, cursory insights.
Many minute attentions, many knowledgeable watchers,
Much cold, much overbearing darkness.
Various long midwinter Glooms.
Various Solitary and Terrible Stars.
Many Frosty Nights, many previously Unseen Sky-flowers.
Many people setting out (some of them kings) all clutching at stars.
More than one North Star, more than one South Star.
Several billion elliptical galaxies, bubble nebulae, binary systems,
Various dust lanes, various routes through varying thicknesses of Dark,
Many tunnels into deep space, minds going back and forth.
Many visions, many digitally enhanced heavens,
All kinds of glistenings being gathered into telescopes:
Fireworks, gasworks, white-streaked works of Dusk,
Works of wonder and/or water, snowflakes, stars of frost . . .
Various dazed astronomers dilating their eyes,
Various astronauts setting out into laughterless earthlessness,
Various 5,000-year-old moon maps,
Various blindmen feeling across the heavens in braille.
Various gods making beautiful works in bronze,
Brooches, crowns, triangles, cups and chains,
And all sorts of drystone stars put together without mortar.
Many Wisemen remarking the irregular weather.
Many exile energies, many low-voiced followers,
Watches of wisp of various glowing spindles,
Soothsayers, hunters in the High Country of the Zodiac,
Seafarers tossing, tied to a star . . .
Various people coming home (some of them kings). Various headlights.
Two or three children standing or sitting on the low wall.
Various winds, the Sea Wind, the sound-laden Winds of Evening
Blowing the stars towards them, bringing snow.
~~~
Why do you subdue yourself in golds and purples?   
Why do you dim yourself with folded silks?
Do you not see that I can buy brocades in any draper’s shop,   
And that I am choked in the twilight of all these colors.
How pale you would be, and startling—  
How quiet;
But your curves would spring upward   
Like a clear jet of flung water,
You would quiver like a shot-up spray of water,   
You would waver, and relapse, and tremble.   
And I too should tremble,
Watching.
Murex-dyes and tinsel—
And yet I think I could bear your beauty unshaded.
~~~
I lived with visions for my company, Instead of men and women, years ago, And found them gentle mates, nor thought to know A sweeter music than they played to me. But soon their trailing purple was not free Of this world's dust, — their lutes did silent grow, And I myself grew faint and blind below Their vanishing eyes. Then THOU didst come ... to be, Belovèd, what they seemed. Their shining fronts, Their songs, their splendours, (better, yet the same, As river-water hallowed into fonts) Met in thee, and from out thee overcame My soul with satisfaction of all wants — Because God's gifts put man's best dreams to shame.
~~~
Highlight Actions
Enable or disable annotations




won't you celebrate with me
what i have shaped into
a kind of life? i had no model.
born in babylonbabylon Once a great city in Biblical times, see Psalms 137.
both nonwhite and woman
what did i see to be except myself?
i made it up
here on this bridge betweenbetween / starshine and clay Compare to John Keats’s “betwixt damnation and impassion’d clay” in “On Sitting Down to Read King Lear Once Again.” starshine and clay,between / starshine and clay Compare to John Keats’s “betwixt damnation and impassion’d clay” in “On Sitting Down to Read King Lear Once Again.” 
my one hand holding tight
my other hand; come celebrate
with me that everyday
something has tried to kill me
and has failed.
~~~
The sculptures in this gallery have been                        
carefully treated with a protective wax                           
so that visitors may touch them.                                     
~~~
                             first and most important
                             dream our missing friends forward
                             burn their reflections into empty chairs
             we are less bound by time than the clockmaker fears
this morning all I want is to follow where the stone angels point
                      birdsong lashing me to tears
                              heterosexuals need to see our suffering
                   the violent deaths of our friends and lovers
       to know glitter on a queer is not to dazzle but to
  unsettle the foundation of this murderous culture
         defiant weeds smashing up through cement
                      you think Oscar Wilde was funny
                     well Darling I think he was busy
                             distracting straight people
 so they would not kill him if you knew how many times I have been told you’re not like my  gay best friend who tells me jokes and makes me laugh no I sure as fuck am not I have no room in my life to audition for your pansy mascot you people can’t kill me and think you can kill me again I met a tree in Amsterdam and stood barefoot beside it for twenty minutes then left completely restored
     yet another poem not written by a poet
                    sometimes we need one muscle to
                                     relax so the others follow
                                 my friend Mandy calls after a
                               long shift at the strip club to say                             while standing in line for death I am                        fanning my hot pussy with your new book                   will you sign it next week my fearless faggot sister
~~~
To sing of Wars, of Captains, and of Kings, Of Cities founded, Common-wealths begun, For my mean Pen are too superior things; Or how they all, or each their dates have run, Let Poets and Historians set these forth. My obscure lines shall not so dim their worth. But when my wond’ring eyes and envious heart Great Bartas’ sugar’d lines do but read o’er, Fool, I do grudge the Muses did not part ‘Twixt him and me that over-fluent store. A Bartas can do what a Bartas will But simple I according to my skill. From School-boy’s tongue no Rhet’ric we expect, Nor yet a sweet Consort from broken strings, Nor perfect beauty where’s a main defect. My foolish, broken, blemished Muse so sings, And this to mend, alas, no Art is able, ‘Cause Nature made it so irreparable. Nor can I, like that fluent sweet-tongued Greek Who lisp’d at first, in future times speak plain. By Art he gladly found what he did seek, A full requital of his striving pain. Art can do much, but this maxim’s most sure: A weak or wounded brain admits no cure. I am obnoxious to each carping tongue Who says my hand a needle better fits. A Poet’s Pen all scorn I should thus wrong, For such despite they cast on female wits. If what I do prove well, it won’t advance, They’ll say it’s stol’n, or else it was by chance. But sure the antique Greeks were far more mild, Else of our Sex, why feigned they those nine And poesy made Calliope’s own child? So ‘mongst the rest they placed the Arts divine, But this weak knot they will full soon untie. The Greeks did nought but play the fools and lie. Let Greeks be Greeks, and Women what they are. Men have precedency and still excel; It is but vain unjustly to wage war. Men can do best, and Women know it well. Preeminence in all and each is yours; Yet grant some small acknowledgement of ours. And oh ye high flown quills that soar the skies, And ever with your prey still catch your praise, If e’er you deign these lowly lines your eyes, Give thyme or Parsley wreath, I ask no Bays. This mean and unrefined ore of mine Will make your glist’ring gold but more to shine. 
~~~
For John Ashbery



“Good Barber of the Pea!” I exhumed,
high into the vag
where the barber keeps his
pea — 
“Good Sprout!” His mouth, his gray,
hunted tongue,
always in the distance — 
“No use denying
we master the particular service
we deny ourselves. In the shade of this pea
(the sum of his shade and the gavel
flexing above his head)
I will become
a milliner to cover what work I’ve
done. Or else, I’ll begin anew
at the infant chin,
where nothing grows but chins!
Outside, snails, vines, surpass me
and must — gaining pews upon
pews. But don’t think for a sec
I don’t know the way out of here, that release is
one hair — spiral stair — top of which
cleavage evaporates”
~~~
in memory of R.I.S.



1.
Would I know her anywhere, this child
who never knew you except in photographs?
She has your high clear polished forehead, but   
“No, my sister has his dimple, the cleft
in his chin ...”
                         Tight curly hair (like yours)
drawn back, and your face, thinned, refined,   
to a girl’s—you in a girl’s body, you
(thick, muscular, tempestuous)
newly slight, polite: you in a neat   
print skirt, loose black blouse!
Now a seventeen-year-old classicist—
“Latin’s my favorite”—you translate
Catullus, write tidy sonnets, envy the sister   
who remembers the dead father,
but (as you always did) adore your mother   
and walk with your head thrown slightly back   
as if the weight of thought were hard to bear.
I rock in my teacherly chair.
She’s shy, constrained.
“I don’t want to read my father’s poems,   
they’re all in tatters in the closet,
they scare me.”
                        I tell her
I’m kind of a long-lost aunt, tell her
about the photo of you as (you said) “the young Shelley”—
about your huntsman’s bow, opera, baseball,
endless games of chess in the dorm parlor with you
boasting your prowess.
                                  And she’s embarrassed,you’re embarrassed, living in her blood,
to think you ever acted like that!2.
When you were a man, a thirty-seven-year old,   
long after our last fight, last kiss,   
you OD’d on morphine
and disappeared into the blanks   
that always framed your mind.
But she’s sent two poems and a thank-you note,   
and her handwriting—yours—hasn’t changed.   
“It meant a lot to me to talk about my dad,”
you scribbled with your new small fingers.
I want to believe this, want to believe   
you’re really starting out again!
Do me a favor:
                      forget
Catullus, Horace, love and hate
and think, instead, of the epic
cell, the place where the chromosomes   
are made and made for a moment perfect.
Translate those lines from Virgil
some of us once liked to chant,
the ones about beginning, about those who first   
left Troy to seek the Italian shore.
~~~
Must be entered through the sharpener every Sunday,else your name will be lovingly written in the Book of the Down Arrow. The One Steeple to Every Church                                                  rule breaks in halfin the Church of the Open Crayon Box; the One Bellto Every Steeple rule breaks off its tip. “Climb stairs to the steeples,” the preacher commands, “and let every belltone ring out!” You can see the whole townfrom the steeple, and you exit the church through the view, and you walk through what calls itself                                       Flagpole—the town is a blot                                       on the town, but the railroad is coming out this way and we must give them a smear to see through the windows: now you pass the General Store, that even your vaguest stick figure can enter, now you pass a vacant lot: the post office isn’t here yet, is only a set-aside space in the center of the country’s envelope; now you pass the voting-place, where we stuff our handwriting through a slit. Tall trees fall in the pinewoods, tall telegraph poles are raised, and words inch along our wires: text text text stop, text text text stop.And now you pass the Feed Store, which sells carrot and turnip and sugar-beet tops—only the visible parts—and now Whitey BaLavender’s Hardware, where everything hangs off the hook of its color, or color hangs off the hook of its all, where you work your hands into cool washers, and work hands into nailheads of the color blue, and watch Whitey BaLavender busy himself           pouring crayons into bullet molds. You show him a list           that says “ax,” and he sells you a red line through it.                     All up and down Main Street ponies are covered                      with strokes as coarse as horse blankets. And once           you have drawn the ponies you begin to draw the saddle shop, you grip the right color like a saddle horn and somehow keep from falling off, and you ride to the edge of town, where you draw the fur trading post, where they sell tails of any shy animal, the rest of the animal gone down a hole, where you trade in your skin for a possibles bag and wear possibles bag where your skin was. Fat geese fly in any letter you like but you need red meat for once, and write a splayed-hide word like “Deerslayer,” and take hold of the ending                                                         and drag it home,and now you are almost there, now you are building the home with hand-drawn Log Cabin Font, you are building it log by log of course and smoothing the logs with a color called Adze, you are biting the crayon to notch the logs and driving in dots of nailheads. Stumps of umber surround you, and the skyis beginning to look like sky. You are hoping a man can be really          alone here;                             you are hoping your father can tell what it is;and now only the doorknob is left to draw and in your enthusiasm you shout at the paper, and the weather                            changes just in time, not raining, beginning to spit.
~~~
I hustleupstream.
I grasp.I grind.
I control & panic. Poke
balloons in my chest,
always popping there,
always my thoughts thump,
thump. I snooze — wake & go
boom. All day, like this I short
my breath. I scroll & scroll.
I see what you wrote — I like.
I heart. My thumb, so tired.
My head bent down, but not
in prayer, heavy from the looking.
I see your face, your phone-lit
faces. I tap your food, two times
for more hearts. I retweet.
I email: yes & yes & yes.
Then I cry & need to say: no-no-no.
Why does it take so long to reply?
I FOMO & shout. I read. I never
enough. New book. New post.
New ping. A new tab, then another.
Papers on the floor, scattered & stacked.
So many journals, unbroken white spines,
waiting. Did you hear that new new?
I start to text back. Ellipsis, then I forget.
I balk. I lazy the bed. I wallow when I write.
I truth when I lie. I throw a book
when a poem undoes me. I underline
Clifton: today we are possible. I start
from image. I begin with Phillis Wheatley.
I begin with Phillis Wheatley. I begin
with Phillis Wheatley reaching for coal.
I start with a napkin, receipt, or my hand.
I muscle memory. I stutter the page. I fail.
Hit delete — scratch out one more line. I sonnet,
then break form. I make tea, use two bags.
Rooibos again. I bathe now. Epsom salt.
No books or phone. Just water & the sound
of water filling, glory — be my buoyant body,
bowl of me. Yes, lavender, more bubbles
& bath bomb, of course some candles too.
All alone with Coltrane. My favorite, “Naima,”
for his wife, now for me, inside my own womb.
Again, I child back. I float. I sing. I simple
& humble. Eyes close. I low my voice,
was it a psalm? Don’t know. But I stopped.
~~~
This rose-tree is not made to bear The violet blue, nor lily fair,    Nor the sweet mignionet: And if this tree were discontent, Or wished to change its natural bent,    It all in vain would fret. And should it fret, you would suppose It ne’er had seen its own red rose,    Nor after gentle shower Had ever smelled its rose’s scent, Or it could ne’er be discontent    With its own pretty flower. Like such a blind and senseless tree As I’ve imagined this to be,    All envious persons are: With care and culture all may find Some pretty flower in their own mind,    Some talent that is rare.
~~~
Finding an old book on a basement shelf—   gray, spine bent—and reading it again,   I met my former, unfamiliar, self,   some of her notes and scrawls so alien   that, though I tried, I couldn't get (behind   this gloss or that) back to the time she wrote   to guess what experiences she had in mind,   the living context of some scribbled note;   or see the girl beneath the purple ink   who chose this phrase or that to underline,   the mood, the boy, that lay behind her thinking—    but they were thoughts I recognized as mine;   and though there were words I couldn't even read,   blobs and cross-outs; and though not a jot   remained of her old existence—I agreed   with the young annotator's every thought:   A clever girl. So what would she see fit   to comment on—and what would she have to say   about the years that she and I have written   since—before we put the book away?
~~~
She pronounces Chama the name of the milky green river
with a richness in the ch I cannot muster, puts a hard d
on the end of her ands. anD. anD. anD. Like the river
she is asking to be endless anD shifting. To stream.
I’d scouted the knoll of oaks for rattlers, being beyond the bounds
of Coverage having no means to learn their habits.
So I lay down with her on the ground. Their ground. AnD
I willed to forget the cares of my later-in-life job search. Job.
Which is also Job, a man in the Bible. Which is a book.
The oaks of the knoll were leaning into the Chama like girls
washing their hair in basins. I thought of EB shampooing Lota,
of Frost’s birches, of Plath’s Wych elms which I’d like to have
googled. Did snakes favor oak knolls? Did Georgia O’Keeffe worry
about health insurance costs in Abiquiú? AnD beside me my love
streaming, her poodles distantly nosing the chamisa. Standards.
I thought I had them. Put art at the front of the queue
wych is different from quiú. AnD now this. Biblical
the proportions of this breaking-back-into-a-country-I’d-
locked-myself-out-of phase. Was it scenic? I liked
the pachysandra, branches of oak taking all that space
from the sky. But then everybody disappeared to their offices.
Three times I wrote work work work when woke
was what I wanted to write.
Miniature is the acorn
I fingered in the soft flour-sack pocket of my jeans.
Acorn smaller than East Coast or indeed Irish Oak varieties
wych she handed me anD how hungrily I pocketed its little body.
~~~
It had almost nothing to do with sex.
                      The boy
               in his corset and farthingale, his head-
voice and his smooth-for-the-duration chin
                      was not
               and never had been simply in our pay. Or
was it some lost logic the regional accent
                      restores?
               A young Welsh actor may play a reluctant
laborer playing Thisby botching
                      similes
               and stop our hearts with wonder. My young friend
he’s seven—touched his mother’s face last night
                      and said It’s
               wet and, making the connection he has had
to learn by rote, You’re sad.
                      It’s never
               not like this for him. As if,
the adolescents mouth wherever California spills
                      its luminous
               vernacular. As if, until
the gesture holds, or passes. Let’s just
                      say
               we’ll live here for a while. O
habitus. O wall. O moon. For my young
                      friend
               it’s never not some labored
simulacrum, every tone of voice, each
                      give, each
               take is wrested from an unrelenting social
dark. There’s so much dark to go around (how
                      odd
               to be this and no other and, like all
the others, marked for death), it’s a wonder
                      we pass
               for locals at all. Take Thisby for instance:
minutes ago she was fretting for lack of a beard
                      and now
               she weeps for a lover slain by a minute’s
misreading. Reader, it’s
                      sharp
               as the lion’s tooth. Who takes
the weeping away now takes delight as well,
                      which feels
               for all the world like honest
work. They’ve never worked with mind before,
                      the rich
               man says. But moonlight says, With flesh.
~~~
He claps a hand
Across the gaping hole—
Or else the sight might
Well inside to
Melt the mind—if any
Thinking spoke
Were in the wheel,
Or any real
Fright-fragments broke
Out of the gorge to
Soak the breast, the meaning
Might incite a stroke—best
Press against it, close
The clawhole, stand
In stupor, petrified. The dream
Be damned, the deeps defied.
The hand’s to keep
The scream inside.
~~~
1. THE GARDEN Poco sostenuto in A major                         The laving tide of inarticulate air.                      Vivace in A major                         The iris people dance. 2. THE POOL    Allegretto in A minor                         Cool-hearted dim familiar of the dove. 3. THE BIRDS   Presto in F major                         I keep a frequent tryst.                      Presto meno assai                         The blossom-powdered orangeitree. 4. TO THE MOON Allegro con brio in A major                             Moon that shone on Babylon.  TO MOZART What junipers are these, inlaid    With flame of the pomegranate tree? The god of gardens must have made    This still unrumored place for thee To rest from immortality,    And dream within the splendid shade Some more elusive symphony    Than orchestra has ever played.
~~~
I'm selling my old rock records,
the reggae and the Dead,
the Beatles and bands
no one heard after the Amazing
Kathy Dalton became less so
and Airto—busted for possession,
his album's face behind ten fingers
blacked with stationhouse ink—
deported. A Stone retired,
Mick past fifty, Van Morrison—
composer of the world's best
Celtic fuck music—gone spiritual,
while "Peaceful Easy Feeling"
sells Prozac, and the trippy
paisley vinyl of Dave Mason's
"Alone Together," Big Brother's
funky R. Crumb cover (fat nipply Janis
dragging that ball and chain) are quaint
collectibles, like Fiestaware or bottles
from defunct breweries; useful things
no one uses anymore, worth money.
~~~
You jerk you didn't call me up
I haven't seen you in so long
You probably have a fucking tan
& besides that instead of making love tonight
You're drinking your parents to the airport
I'm through with you bourgeois boys
All you ever do is go back to ancestral comforts
Only money can get—even Catullus was rich but
Nowadays you guys settle for a couch
By a soporific color cable t.v. set
Instead of any arc of love, no wonder
The G.I. Joe team blows it every other time
Wake up! It's the middle of the night
You can either make love or die at the hands of the Cobra Commander
_________________
To make love, turn to page 121.
To die, turn to page 172.
~~~
At the podium
measured and grave as a metronome
the (white, male) poet with bald-
gleaming head broods in gnom-
ic syllables on the death
of 12-year-old (black, male) Tamir Rice
shot in a park
by a Cleveland police officer
claiming to believe
the boy’s plastic pistol
was a “real gun”
like his own eager
to discharge and slay
 
 while twelve feet away at the edge of the bright-lit stage the (white, female) interpreter signing for the deaf is stricken with emotion — horror, pity, disbelief — outrage, sorrow — young-woman face contorted and eyes spilling tears like Tamir Rice’s mother perhaps, or the sister made to witness the child’s bleeding out in the Cleveland park. We stare as the interpreter’s fingers pluck the poet’s words out of the air like bullets, break open stanzas tight as conches with the deft ferocity of a cormo- rant and render gnome-speech raw as hurt, as harm, as human terror wet-eyed and mouth-grimaced in horror’s perfect O.
~~~
I am four in this photograph, standing   
on a wide strip of Mississippi beach,   
my hands on the flowered hips
of a bright bikini. My toes dig in,   
curl around wet sand. The sun cuts   
the rippling Gulf in flashes with each   
tidal rush. Minnows dart at my feet
glinting like switchblades. I am alone
except for my grandmother, other side   
of the camera, telling me how to pose.   
It is 1970, two years after they opened   
the rest of this beach to us,   
forty years since the photograph   
where she stood on a narrow plot   
of sand marked colored, smiling,
her hands on the flowered hips   
of a cotton meal-sack dress.
~~~
Talking, we begin to find the way into
our hearts, we who knew no words,
words being a rare commodity
in those countries we left behind.
Both refugees and similarly deprived,
we marvel at the many things there
are to say: so many variations
and colors of the same thought, so
many different lengths in the words
that line up together on our tongues.
No scarcity, no rationing, no
waiting in line in order to buy
the same answer we heard each time
we asked, that one word, owned by
the state, manufactured by the state,
serving all purposes equally alike:
No, No, No, and sometimes Never.
~~~
... who spoke late
echolalic, then in similes,
by the lake,
where the sticks were her
long mosquitoes, her lava
pyramid brown rice.Got a crush on a suffix,
giggled, blushed,
at every -tion. And there were
many, in conversation,
flirting with her.
Pre-dejection.
Pseudoabstraction.As she grew into
orchestration, a white
sport coat and a pink
carnation, crenellation,
inhalation—
had I known
too much lamentation?I, who have lived
isolation, seen sun
as lion,
its mane’s
diffusion; offered her
a turnip moon,
close-shaven.
Parental anomaly,
weird shared ions.
A word-prescription.
A nerve-ending infatuation.I’m blessed
she’s the termination of me,
last blood relation.
Daughter, if you follow land
to its suffix, there’s ocean,
which I know your toes,
bare, still-growing, slim,
will never shun.
~~~
A voice from the dark called out,
             ‘The poets must give us
imagination of peace, to oust the intense, familiar
imagination of disaster. Peace, not only
the absence of war.’
                                   But peace, like a poem,
is not there ahead of itself,
can’t be imagined before it is made,
can’t be known except
in the words of its making,
grammar of justice,
syntax of mutual aid.
                                       A feeling towards it,
dimly sensing a rhythm, is all we have
until we begin to utter its metaphors,
learning them as we speak.
                                              A line of peace might appear
if we restructured the sentence our lives are making,
revoked its reaffirmation of profit and power,
questioned our needs, allowed
long pauses . . .
                        A cadence of peace might balance its weight
on that different fulcrum; peace, a presence,
an energy field more intense than war,
might pulse then,
stanza by stanza into the world,
each act of living
one of its words, each word
a vibration of light—facets
of the forming crystal.
~~~
Work out your own salvation
with fear and trembling.
                            —St. Paul



I was already an old man when I was born. 
Small with a curved back, he dragged his leg when walking
the streets of Copenhagen. "Little Kierkegaard,”
they called him. Some meant it kindly. The more one suffersthe more one acquires a sense of the comic. 
His hair rose in waves six inches above his head.Save me, O God, from ever becoming sure. What good is faith if it is not irrational?
 Christianity requires a conviction of sin. 
As a boy tending sheep on the frozen heath,
his starving father cursed God for his cruelty.
His fortunes changed. He grew rich and married well.
His father knew these blessings were God's punishment.
All would be stripped away. His beautiful wife died,
then five of his children. Crippled Soren survived.The self-consuming sickness unto death is despair.
 What the age needs is not a genius but a martyr.
Soren fell in love, proposed, then broke the engagement.
No one, he thought, could bear his presence daily.My sorrow is my castle. His books were read
but ridiculed. Cartoons mocked his deformities
His private journals fill seven thousand pages.
You could read them all, he claimed, and still not know him.He who explains this riddle explains my life.
 When everyone is Christian, Christianitydoes not exist. The crowd is untruth. Rememberwe stand alone before God in fear and trembling.
At forty-two he collapsed on his daily walk.
Dying he seemed radiant. His skin had become
almost transparent. He refused communion
from the established church. His grave has no headstone.Now with God's help I shall at last become myself.
~~~
ROXANA from the court retiring late,Sigh'd her soft sorrows at St. JAMES's gate:Such heavy thoughts lay brooding in her breast,Not her own chairmen wth more weight opprest;They groan the cruel load they're doom'd to bear ;She in these gentler sounds express'd her care." Was it for this, that I these Roses wear," For this new-set my Jewels for my hair ?" Ah ! Princess ! with what zeal have I pursu'd !" Almost forgot the duty of a Prude." Thinking I never cou'd attend too soon," I've miss'd my prayers, to get me dress'd by noon." For Thee, ah ! what for Thee did I resign ?" My Pleasures, Passions, all that e'er was mine." I sacrific'd both Modesty and Ease," Left Operas, and went to filthy Plays ;" Double entendres shock'd my tender ear," Yet even this for Thee I chose to bear." In glowing youth, when nature bids be gay," And ev'ry joy of life before me lay," By honour prompted, and by pride restrain'd," The pleasures of the young my soul disdain'd :" Sermons I sought, and with a mien severe" Censur'd my neighbours, and said daily pray'r." Alas ! how chang'd! — with the same sermon mien " That once I pray'd, the What-d'ye call't I've seen." Ah ! cruel Princess, for thy sake I've lost" That reputation which so dear had cost :" I, who avoided ev'ry publick place," When bloom, and beauty bid me show my face ;" Now near Thee constant ev'ry night abide" With never-failing duty by thy side," Myself and daughters standing on a row," To all the foreigners a goodly show !" Oft had your drawing-room been sadly thin," And merchants wives close by the chair had been seen ;" Had not I amply fill'd the empty space," And sav'd your Highness from the dire disgrace." Yet COQUETILLA's artifice prevails," When all my merit and my duty fails :" That COQUETILLA, whose deluding airs" Corrupts our virgins, and our youth ensnares ;" So sunk her character, so lost her fame," Scarce visited before your Highness came ;" Yet for the Bed-chamber 'tis Her you chuse," When Zeal and Fame and Virtue you refuse." Ah ! worthy choice ! not one of all your train" Whom censure blasts not, and dishonours stain." Let the nice hind now suckle dirty pigs," And the proud pea-hen snatch the cuckoo's eggs !" Let IRIS leave her paint, and own her age," And grave SUFFOLKIA wed a giddy page !" A greater miracle is daily view'd," A virtuous Princess with a court so lewd." I know thee, Court ! with all thy treach'rous wiles," Thy false caresses and undoing smiles !" Ah ! Princess, learn'd in all the courtly arts" To cheat our hopes, and yet to gain our hearts." Large lovely bribes are the great statesman's aim ;" And the neglected patriot follows fame." The Prince is ogled ; some the King pursue ;" But your ROXANA only follows YOU." Despis'd ROXANA, cease, and try to find" Some other, since the Princess proves unkind :" Perhaps it is not hard to find at court" If not a greater, a more firm support.
~~~
It is eighty degrees in December.
It is he, on one of his furloughs,
bringing himself — and hell — up to date.My Don Juan, the better climber
(as the mercury yo-yos),is in a newly roused state,
the world circumcised away
from an out-of-season bud
leaving at the scrupulous rim,as it unfurls, a darker appliqué,
like O-positive frozen solidat the sight of one’s resuscitated victim.
This rosebush assiduously forks over
its works where most grandifloras falter,
thriving as far into the year as Capricorn.While named after a lover,
it decorates its own altarand wields an extraordinary thorn:
once I saw it catch a football
in those semiquaver quasi-teeth;
it is three-headed, like Cerberus,a hybrid drawing bloodlines from a root-ball
on hands all that’s impure lies beneath.Hands can train it, barbarous
as it is, on an arbor, and I might like
to take its thick canes in harness,
first pouring cement as a base(so it would know I meant business).
Always poised to strike,they eventually undo their stays,
baying out like a window
of garnet, as at Chartres
(torture chamber in its basement,or so I hear). I wonder how
such a daemon rose got its start,what fairy tale explains its scent    ...    
And then I go out tonight
and find him, swiping right
on every pretty face in candlelight.It is almost Christmas. Stacks
of square plates. (It’s an open plan.) Racksof bottles. The whites and blacks,
clear glass, and stainless steel sieves
denote compliance with standards.
A wire basket of freckled pearsis transparency; sterilized knives
give full disclosure; and as regardsthe stemware, due diligence dares
a slip, especially on chanteuses like these
salting down from state-of-the-art speakers.
(Or is it sugar?) Does the chorizo flambénot deter him? Gold as all hell, Valkyries
stand tall with beer to the brim. Beakersin Siren form flush with Chianti, if not ambi-
valence. Recalling the steel meshes
belting Monterosso’s
cliffs against the voxDei of the sea, the myth refleshes:
ordering, in the manner of heroes,an Andromeda on the rocks.
~~~
My own dear love, he is strong and bold
      And he cares not what comes after.
His words ring sweet as a chime of gold,
      And his eyes are lit with laughter.
He is jubilant as a flag unfurled—
      Oh, a girl, she’d not forget him.
My own dear love, he is all my world,—
      And I wish I’d never met him.
My love, he’s mad, and my love, he’s fleet,
      And a wild young wood-thing bore him!
The ways are fair to his roaming feet,
      And the skies are sunlit for him.
As sharply sweet to my heart he seems
      As the fragrance of acacia.
My own dear love, he is all my dreams,—
      And I wish he were in Asia.
My love runs by like a day in June,
      And he makes no friends of sorrows.
He’ll tread his galloping rigadoon
      In the pathway of the morrows.
He’ll live his days where the sunbeams start,
      Nor could storm or wind uproot him.
My own dear love, he is all my heart,—
      And I wish somebody’d shoot him.
~~~
Father Lear the king so shaped his bairns
with the wand’s upper hand
the fire’s swanny wing
smooth tippet of the spider
In the very kingdom of herbs and servants
he shaped them
from peace vessels of the animals
from toil of the flesh
from milk horses and the birds of sighed mercy
and the tongue undone
He shaped his bairns
in night’s long harm and in day’s bright psalter
in the seven courts of the north
and with the mild birch of the paternoster
From his ploughing fields and his sweat
his toothèd heart and his waxing wit
Father Lear the king shaped his bairns
for good or ill           this he did
~~~
Who died and made you Elvis?
      —Bumper sticker



The big rock by my door
is a plaster prop, after
all. I’m back to hear
screams for what I can’t
do, couldn’t do forty
years ago. Awkward
pelvic thrusts fooled
the camera and virgins,
but I have no more fish-
fry tunes left to dress
up on brand new plates.
This time around,
I spend all day singing
cracked Mississippi
homilies. Why
did I want to live
forever in the first place?
Salvation felt better dead,
floating home free
while my bones, secret
and brown, mingle
with old dirt.
~~~
Based on Epictetus



APPROACH LIFE AS IF IT WERE A BANQUET  Your rightful portion averts your ireful potion:Caress what can’t be blessed, cup shadows under breasts.Let pass what’s out of   ken: lover, job, riches, a ripe peach                       until it reaches you.Bring salt for your honey, lime for your grenadine.Money’s not your fault. You’re a feathered peahen                                                preening for marzipan men.Impeccable models, often peccable, drop their pants at inopportune instants.Implore no more                                for what is, is no more.   EVERYTHING HAS TWO HANDLES   Whether to grapple the hurt or hold              the calm: Can reason spread                             where ire infests the mind?The handle you refuse               to grasp proclaims you more than one                                            you lurch to reach.Why mire in the right/wrong amphora song.No vigilance in this choir of one.             No fast hook in the urn’s                            broken-off arm.                            Vie with hot verities.The pie is getting cold. OUR DUTIES ARE IN RELATION TO ONE ANOTHER  Feel unique in roiling solitude? Oh, you are not alonethough you may feel fallen, snow up your nose. Join             with others in your dank reclusion.How do you find something worth saying?How do you find desire to find desire              to find something worth saying?And yes. That is where you might be: twice —or is it thrice — removed in a receding               mirror of acedia. Finding a way to find a way to want to find a way back into conversation. This is what negative numbers               (a negative soul) feel like: You want to want to want ...If   you go back far enough — lateral excavation —will you hit bone? So many converging lines yakking             to themselves over a haywire switchboardyou used to find out who you were through cookie crumbs tossed down your own path.              Now that you have no crumbs, don’teven have pockets to turn out—only the memoryof such acts, such things. How weary, stale, and               profligate it seems to be to plasticize theselines. You’re in a hamless state of mind. Now get out and talk to anyone your age: Like you               they’ve all got Death studded on the tongue, which livelies up the talk they walk. 
~~~
“That all these dyings may be life in death”



I was living in San Francisco  My heart was in Manhattan It made no sense, no reference point  Hearing the sad horns at night,  fragile evocations of female stuff  The 3 tones (the last most resonant) were like warnings, haiku-muezzins at dawn The call came in the afternoon  “Frank, is that really you?” I'd awake chilled at dawn in the wooden house like an old ship  Stay bundled through the day sitting on the stoop to catch the sun I lived near the park whose deep green  over my shoulder made life cooler  Was my spirit faltering, grown duller? I want to be free of poetry's ornaments,  its duty, free of constant irritation,  me in it, what was grander reason  for being? Do it, why? (Why, Frank?)  To make the energies dance etc. My coat a cape of horrors I'd walk through town or impending earthquake. Was that it?  Ominous days. Street shiny with  hallucinatory light on sad dogs, too many religious people, or a woman  startled me by her look of indecision  near the empty stadium I walked back spooked by my own darkness Then Frank called to say “What? Not done complaining yet?  Can't you smell the eucalyptus, have you never neared the Pacific?  ‘While frank and free/call for musick while your veins swell’”  he sang, quoting a metaphysician  "Don't you know the secret, how to  wake up and see you don't exist, but  that does, don't you see phenomena  is so much more important than this?  I always love that.” “Always?” I cried, wanting to believe him  “Yes.” “But say more! How can you if  it's sad & dead?” “But that's just it!  If! It isn't. It doesn't want to be Do you want to be?” He was warming to his song  “Of course I don't have to put up with as  much as you do these days. These years.  But I do miss the color, the architecture,  the talk. You know, it was the life!  And dying is such an insult. After all  I was in love with breath and I loved  embracing those others, the lovers,  with my body.” He sighed & laughed  He wasn't quite as I'd remembered him  Not less generous, but more abstract  Did he even have a voice now, I wondered  or did I think it up in the middle  of this long day, phone in hand now  dialing Manhattan
~~~
“History always dresses us for the wrong occasions.”
—Ricardo Pau-Llosa
 



Camera Obscura
The afternoon lightening his shadow,
Fidel descends from the mountains,
the clean-shaven lawyer turned guerilla,
his eyes focused on infinity,
El Jefe Máximo con sus Barbudos,
rebels with rosary beads
on their 600-mile procession across the island
with campesinos on horseback, flatbed trucks, tanks,
a new year’s journey down the oldest roads
towards betrayal.Ambient light. Available light
Light inside of them,
nameless isleños line El Malecón to touch Fidel,
already defining himself in black and white.
The dramatic sky moving in for the close-up
that will frame his all-night oratory,
he turns to the crowd,
variations on an enigma,
waving from his pulpit with rehearsed eloquence,
a dove on his shoulder.
This is a photograph. This is not a sign.Flash-on camera. Celebrity portraits.
          1.     Fidel on a balcony across the street
                  from Grand Central Station,
                  an American flag above his head,
                  New York, 1959.
          2.     Fidel made small by the Lincoln Memorial,
                  Washington D.C., 1959.
          3.     Fidel learning to ski,
                  a minor black ball against a white landscape,
                  Russia, 1962.
          4.     Fidel and shotgun,
                  hunting with Nikita,
                  Russia, 1962.Circles of Confusion
Beyond photographs,
Havana is looted and burned.
Women weep at out wailing wall,
El Paredón, where traitors are taken,
and television cameras shoot
the executions, this blood soup,
the paradoxes of our lives,
three years before I am born.Photoflood
But it is late afternoon,
and a shower of confetti and serpentine
falls from every floor of the Havana Hilton,
where history is a giant piñata,
where at midnight, Fidel will be photographed
eating a ham sandwich.
~~~
In Exodus
Moses is hidden
in a cleft, behind God’s hand,
begging,
and he sees — rushing past him — 
God’s back, diminishing.
Moses stops begging.
God’s back is black fog.
I know. He, we guess,
means to do it,
to do all of this.
The brute center part
of an iridescent moth.
The carnation
against the man.
~~~
even if we won’t admit it.  Getting off the subway at Canal St. —   I wonder if the author is a man or a woman? A teen? A team?
~~~
No crooked leg, no bleared eye,No part deformed out of kind,Nor yet so ugly half can beAs is the inward suspicious mind.
~~~
All our roads go nowhere.
Maps are curled
To keep the pavement definitely
On the world.
All our footsteps, set to make
Metric advance,
Lapse into arcs in deference
To circumstance.
All our journeys nearing Space
Skirt it with care,
Shying at the distances
Present in air.
Blithely travel-stained and worn,
Erect and sure,
All our travels go forth,
Making down the roads of Earth
Endless detour.
~~~
I whole in body, and in mind,       but very weak in purse, Do make, and write my testament       for fear it will be worse. And first I wholly do commend       my soul and body eke, To God the Father and the Son,       so long as I can speak. And after speech, my soul to him,       and body to the grave, Till time that all shall rise again,       their Judgement for to have, And then I hope they both shall meet,       to dwell for aye in joy; Whereas I trust to see my friends       released from all annoy. Thus have you heard touching my soul,       and body what I mean: I trust you all will witness bear,       I have a steadfast brain. O God, now let me dispose such things,       as I shall leave behind, That those which shall receive the same,       may know my willing mind. I first of all to London leave,       because I there was bred, Brave buildings rare, of churches store,       and Paul’s to the head. Between the same, fair treats there be,       and people goodly store; Because their keeping craveth cost,       I yet will leave him more. First for their food, I butchers leave,       that every day shall kill; By Thames you shall have brewers’ store,       and bakers at your will. And such as orders do observe,       and eat fish thrice a week, I leave two streets, full fraught therewith,       they need not far to seek. Watling Street, and Canwick Street,       I full of woolen leave; And linen store in Friday Street,       if they me not deceive. And those which are of calling such,       that costlier they require, I mercers leave, with silk so rich,       as any would desire. In Cheap of them, they store shall find,       and likewise in that street, I goldsmiths leave, with jewels such,       as are for ladies meet.                      * * * Now when the folk are fed and clad       with such as I have named, For dainty mouths, and stomachs weak       some junckets must be framed. Wherefore I potecaries leave,       with banquets in their shop, Physicians also for the sick,       Diseases for to stop. Some roysters still must bide in thee,       and such as cut it out; That with the guiltless quarrel will,       to let their blood about. For them I cunning surgeons leave,       some plasters to apply, That ruffians may not still be hanged,        nor quiet persons die.                      * * * To all the bookbinders by Paul’s,        because I like their art, They every week shall money have,       when they from books depart. Among them all, my printer must       have somewhat to his share; I will my friends these books to buy       of him, with other ware. For maidens poor, I widowers rich        do leave, that oft shall dote: And by that means shall marry them,       to set the girls afloat. And wealthy widows will I leave       to help young gentlemen; Which when you have, in any case,       be courteous to them then: And see their plate and jewels eke       may not be marred with rust; Nor let their bags too long be full,       for fear that they do burst.                      * * * And Bedlam must not be forgot,       for that was oft my walk: I people there too many leave,       that out of tune do talk.                      * * * At th’ Inns of Court, I lawyers leave       to take their case in hand. And also leave I at each Inn       of Court, or Chancery, Of gentlemen, a youthful roote,       full of activity, For whom I store of books have left,        at each bookbinder’s stall: And part of all that London hath,       to furnish them withal. And when they are with study cloyed,       to recreate their mind, Of tennis courts, of dancing schools,       and fence they store shall find. And every Sunday at the least,       I leave to make them sport, In divers places players, that       of wonders shall report. Now, London, have I (for thy sake)       within thee, and without, As comes into my memory,       dispersèd ’round about Such needful things as they should have,       here left now unto thee; When I am gone, with conscience,       let them dispersèd be. And though I nothing namèd have,       to bury me withal, Consider that above the ground,       annoyance be I shall. And let me have a shrouding sheet       to cover me from shame, And in oblivion bury me,       and never more me name. Ringings nor other ceremonies       use you not for cost, Nor at my burial, make no feast,       your money were but lost.                      * * * This XX of October, I,       in ANNO DOMINI, A thousand, v. hundred seventy-three,       as almanacs descry, Did write this will with mine own hand,       and it to London gave; In witness of the standers-by,       whose names, if you will have, paper, pen and standish were,       at that same present by, With Time, who promised to reveal       so fast as she could buy The same, lest of my nearer kin       for any thing should vary; So finally I make an end       no longer can I tarry.
~~~
Houses red as flower of bean,Flickering leaves and shadows lean!Pantalone, like a parrot,Sat and grumbled in the garret—Sat and growled and grumbled till Moon upon the window-sillLike a red geraniumScented his bald cranium.Said Brighella, meaning well:“Pack your box and—go to Hell!Heat will cure your rheumatism!” . . .Silence crowned this optimism—Not a sound and not a wail:But the fire (lush leafy vales)Watched the angry feathers fly.Pantalone ’gan to cry—Could not, would not, pack his box!Shadows (curtseying hens and cocks)Pecking in the attic gloomTried to smother his tail-plume . . .Till a cockscomb candle-flameCrowing loudly, died: Dawn came.
~~~
I have made love with Pablo Neruda
On the heights of Machu Picchu
I flashed the tattoo on my thigh
And hitched a lowride with Luis Rodriguez
I have held Adrian Louis close
And danced a wild reservation two-step
Until beer cans and disposable diapers
Spun around us like stars.
I have surrendered to Leonel Rugama’s
Burning adolescent heat
And caressed Roque Dalton
From a luxuriance of bed sheets and red wine.
I stayed up all night reading Sherman Alexie,
Nine months later, I gave birth to twin poems.
This lust is not heterosexual.
I devour Nikki Giovanni and Patricia Smith
Like Sao Tome chocolate.
I have been known to steal away for
An afternoon tryst with Julia de Burgos.
I wrap Nellie Wong around me like a silk robe.
Tonight, I have a date to share a steamy bath
With Linda Hogan and Joy Harjo
And it’s gonna be gooooood . . .
~~~
High-hearted Surrey! I do love your ways, Venturous, frank, romantic, vehement, All with inviolate honor sealed and blent, To the axe-edge that cleft your soldier-bays: I love your youth, your friendships, whims, and frays; Your strict, sweet verse, with its imperious bent, Heard as in dreams from some old harper’s tent, And stirring in the listener’s brain for days. Good father-poet! if to-night there be At Framlingham none save the north-wind’s sighs, No guard but moonlight’s crossed and trailing spears, Smile yet upon the pilgrim named like me, Close at your gates, whose fond and weary eyes Sought not one other down three hundred years!
~~~
I want you with me, and yet you are the end
of my privacy. Do you see how these rooms
have become public? How we glance to see if—
who? Who did you imagine?
Surely we’re not here alone, you and I.
I’ve been wandering
where the cold tracks of language
collapse into cinders, unburnable trash.
Beyond that, all I can see is the remote cold
of meteors before their avalanches of farewell.
If you asked me what words
a voice like this one says in parting,
I’d say, I’m sweeping an empty factory
toward which I feel neither hostility nor nostalgia.
I’m just a broom, sweeping.
~~~
I wanted to tell the veterinary assistant about the cat video Jason sent me
But I resisted for fear she'd think it strange
I am very lonely
Yesterday my boyfriend called me, drunk again
And interspersed between ringing tears and clinginess
He screamed at me with a kind of bitterness
No other human had before to my ears
And told me that I was no good
Well maybe he didn't mean that
But that is what I heard
When he told me my life was not worthwhile
And my life's work the work of the elite.
I say I want to save the world but really
I want to write poems all day
I want to rise, write poems, go to sleep,
Write poems in my sleep
Make my dreams poems
Make my body a poem with beautiful clothes
I want my face to be a poem
I have just learned how to apply
Eyeliner to the corners of my eyes to make them appear wide
There is a romantic abandon in me always
I want to feel the dread for others
I can feel it through song
Only through song am I able to sum up so many words into a few
Like when he said I am no good
I am no good
Goodness is not the point anymore
Holding on to things
Now that's the point
~~~
what thoughts I have of you tonight, Du Bois
of bodies rocked and minds embalmed in bark
our blanched arrival—seethin with scandal's mark
nowadays I peep you in the bean-pie seller's poise
with that silhouette fit for bust or cameo
I can't always divine your debonair birth
or your boocoo brain laborin like an earth
in hallelujah's ether, somehow duckin death's blow
sure sprung from Imhotep's kundalini
stitchin white reconstruction's funeral shroud
scriptin Philly dirges for the cryin out loud
cussin Garvey's name over martinis
sometimes I wonder if you double agent on the page
or mastermind of our ordered rage
 
~~~
Where sunless rivers weepTheir waves into the deep,She sleeps a charmed sleep:
     Awake her not.Led by a single star,She came from very farTo seek where shadows are
     Her pleasant lot.She left the rosy morn,She left the fields of corn,For twilight cold and lorn
     And water springs.Through sleep, as through a veil,She sees the sky look pale,And hears the nightingale
     That sadly sings.Rest, rest, a perfect restShed over brow and breast;Her face is toward the west,
     The purple land.She cannot see the grainRipening on hill and plain;She cannot feel the rain
     Upon her hand.Rest, rest, for evermoreUpon a mossy shore;Rest, rest at the heart's core
     Till time shall cease:Sleep that no pain shall wake;Night that no morn shall breakTill joy shall overtake
     Her perfect peace.
~~~
Sweetheart
when you break thru
you’ll find
a poet here
not quite what one would choose.
I won’t promise
you’ll never go hungry
or that you won’t be sad
on this gutted
breaking
globe
but I can show you
baby
enough to love
to break your heart
forever
~~~
              B.D. was a decent
poet but difficult
to define or for himself to self-divine,
a follower, a “gift” the way one seeker,
loose but selective,
identified himself
to an intoxication
reading obnubilating poems
in a brick-and-river town:
a generous, ecstatic overnight.
A present, or an absence
needing to be present, who tailed me,
who mailed women years ago when he
was free with his attention,
a fixation that he felt attended him.
               Sometimes several times a week
then several times a day
he’d write me, for he was free
to borrow books, go to the mailbox
at 3 a.m., for it was urgent that he send
a bride issue of Vogue, Bazaar,
(not Seventeen, but Glamour, but not Ms.)
from the Heartland where
(Don’t forget our wedding date!)
he bubble wrapped some trinkets, snapshots — 
poses of his parakeet beside his own long head
               meeting at an angle in a steely mirror.
His wife, from her wheelchair,
had made their camera flash.He tried to kill his wife
with a little hammer
~~~
The economical ikebana
of the lesser octopus
is disarming,
 
a sextopus, holding
its intelligence
& ink
 
in a concentrate.
Not some sloppy octopus
who suddenly
 
freaks, so princessy, rich.
Driven to abstraction
not unlike flowers
 
dropping their petals
because petals are garbage
off the bloom,
 
not expensive anymore
thus going inside
to find meaning.
 
Cut the eyes, then, from
the cruel ikebana
of the racehorse—
 
if a leg breaks she can't
bear her own
weight,
 
long-blossomed head
turns to glue
and the fortune
 
zooms off like flies
from a carcass
when shooed.
 
The tripod fell
so I had to cast about
for my crutch
 
to walk over—my bad
left knee buckling—
to right it.
 
I want to take a picture
of the flowers
I arranged
 
after an ikebana class,
just one. I quit
quickly
 
but still hope to learn
to arrange beauty
classically.
 
Maybe I'm lazy, or
don't apply the rules
to myself,
 
or maybe "laze" is just
"zeal" rearranged,
as in my case.
 
Even now, the clock
we need to punch
out on is too far
 
away to plug in,
so power collects
in its hands. 
~~~
I passed through nature

 

into the next. Children

 

running in unsupervised shadows.

 

Last century’s fountains learning

 

not to lie. Risk

 

to identify with only

 

one element since one

 

will die but in

 

the summer air around

 

each thought, something is

 

built and avoided. You

 

go through an arch

 

and aren’t the arch,

 

just infinity of form,

 

curve’s curve of becoming,

 

a phrase tracking it

 

to future’s celadon relief.

 

As others dressed as

 

others we were supposed

 

to meet. Citizens walked

 

here without disappointment, seeing

 

no statue or palace

 

with eleven axes, patient

 

in the mindless heat—
~~~
That I might chisel a statue, line on line,    Out of a marble’s chaste severities!    Angular, harsh; no softened curves to please; Set tears within the eyes to make them shine, And furrows on the brow, deep, stern, yet fine;    Gaunt, awkward, tall; no courtier of ease;    The trousers bulging at the bony knees; Long nose, large mouth . . . But ah, the light divine Of Truth, – the light that set a people free!—    Burning upon it in a steady flame,    As sunset fires a white peak on the sky . . .Ah, God! To leave it nameless and yet see    Men looking weep and bow themselves and cry—    ‘Enough, enough! We know thy statue’s name!’
~~~
Always a broom leaned against a wall,meals never on time, if they come at all.Days without dates through which she movesempty and stubborn, slightly confused.Ironing hung dejectedly over a chair,gestures that come from who-knows-where.Old letters unanswered, piled together,papers and pills stuffed deep in a drawer.Thankful to be part of your heart’s great wholeyet devoted to the limits of her own small skull.O orderly biped, take heed,leave her alone—let her read.
~~~
Oh, but to fade, and live we know not where, To be a cold obstruction and to groan! This sensible, warm woman to become A prudish clod; and the delighted spirit To live and die alone, or to reside With married sisters, and to have the care Of half a dozen children, not your own; And driven, for no one wants you, Round the pendant world; or worse than worse Of those that disappointment and pure spite Have driven to madness: ’Tis too horrible! The weariest and most troubled married life That age, ache, penury, or jealousy Can lay on nature, is a paradise To being an old maid.   That very time I saw, (but thou couldst not,) Walking between the garden and the barn, Reuben, all armed; a certain aim he took At a young chicken standing by a post, And loosed his bullet smartly from his gun, As he would kill a hundred thousand hens. But I might see young Reuben’s fiery shot Lodged in the chaste board of the garden fence, And the domesticated fowl passed on, In henly meditation, bullet free.  My father had a daughter got a man, As it might be, perhaps, were I good-looking, I should, your lordship. And what’s her residence? A hut my lord, she never owned a house, But let her husband, like a graceless scamp, Spend all her little means,—she thought she ought,— And in a wretched chamber, on an alley, She worked like masons on a monument, Earning their bread. Was not this love indeed?
~~~
           The goal of the Meisner acting technique has often been described 
           as getting actors to "live truthfully under imaginary circumstances."
           Here are some acting games we have found useful. 



I.
THE REPETITION GAME:
The Moment is a Tricky Fucker
~~~
As soon as possible, I will confront the wren’s
              doings, rinse the white streaks from the porch bricks
drawing lizards from their shade, the immediate
              smell of water too much for all of us.
But first is lunch. The remains we’ll scatter over
              the driveway away from the bricks. Wrens come,
crusts from our dishes make drama. Then history.
What is possible in memory is disingenuous.
              Limestone, impressed with the archaic smile
of bone and reptilian wrists, wishbones and feathers,
              describes. It cups the transitional form,
naturally selecting one’s best side. There was
              the time you forgot your legs no longer
could recall how to stand—then rose up straight and sang              You’ll come a-waltzing Matilda with me
Probably I’ve been thinking of that since August.
              The indelible wrens grate like shovels
outside—exhumed, one voice rises from wilderness,
              echoes,
                            settles, rests
                                          —then another, and,
between them, the keep of an unerring quiet.
~~~
     What objects may be in themselves, and apart from all     
     this receptivity of our sensibility, remains completely    
     unknown to us. We know nothing but our mode of     
     perceiving them. . . . With this alone have we     
     any concern.
     
     —Immanuel Kant, Critique of Pure Reason




At a church rummage sale, I study the perfection of shadows
in a painting by Caravaggio, although what I hold
is only a small print of Christ—its frame broken—dining
at Emmaus with three of the Apostles. And because the table
is dramatically, if not unbelievably, lit, the bowls & pitcher
& loaves send their dark crescents onto the immaculate
white cloth. When the Savior raises his hand to offer a blessing,
its shade deepens further his crimson smock. Tenebrosus:
that rich, convincing darkness. As though the master understood
that the obscured world only seems to us somehow
even more familiar, as though our sense of our own unknowing
had at last been made visible—even if what we do not know
cannot itself be seen. The future’s drape, the carnival fortunetellers
of my childhood might have called it, but also the now’s,
displayed as it is—so many unmatched cups & saucers, old coats
& wicker baskets—all around us. At a party last week,
someone said verisimilitude. We were huddled on a tiny porch.
It was the first cool night & the wine had no conclusion.
 
The talk turned quickly to shepherds & the pastoral & then,
to opera, before someone recalled a horror film he’d watched
late one night with his brother. In black & white vignettes,
an evil tree stump possessed by the spirit of an executed prince
hunts the scheming tribal elders who have destroyed him.
A former pro wrestler in a costume of wire & rubber bark
& wearing a permanent scowl lumbers after vengeance
in the confusion & fear of 1957 on a half-dozen root-legs,
driving his victims into quicksand or toppling himself over
upon him. Though here the point is the teller’s small brother
& the boy’s allegiance, even in a state of suspended disbelief,
to what we call sense. How, he wanted to know, suddenly
unusually earnest, did the tree manage to get itself up again?
 
Yesterday I spoke to a friend who is despairing: back home,
waiting tables, he’s dating a woman whose marriage has only
just come to an end. When he wakes, he discovers he does not
recognize himself. One afternoon, walking home from school,
I hit my best friend in the face with a book. It may well be
that she hit me. Thin pages flew out into the street. More punches
were thrown & I came away bruised. In that book, a novel
by Emily Brontë, the land is violent & unjust & we are violent
& unjust upon it. Even worse, our greatest passions
change nothing at all. Before one of us hit the other,
there must have been a cause, but I can’t recall it, which makes it
seem nonlinear now, &, thus, apocryphal, both impossible
& impossibly real. I failed, though I tried, to offer comfort.
 
It’s not that our lives don’t resemble our lives. I’ve been alone
so often lately I sometimes catch myself watching myself—
breathing in the fresh spears of rosemary or admiring the shallots,
peeling their translucent wrappers away, centering one on the board,
making the first careful cut, lifting the purple halves.
 
Before stories, we were too busy for stories, too busy
hunting & suffering to invent the tales of our own
resurrections. Caught out in the kitchen’s brightness last night,
the handle of the skillet cast its simple, perfected form
across the stove—pierced, like the eye of the needle, so that
it can be hung from a hook, as pans, presumably, have always been.
 
Outside the wind picked up. Thunder. The dog trotted off,
hid her head beneath the chair. But today: a charity sale
at Trinity Chapel & sun on the tar of the buckled walks.
In the cracks, beads of water spin into light. Tell yourself
it’s simple: this is where it’s been heading all along. Tell yourself
something you have no faith in has already begun to occur.
~~~
Prostrating before the golden figure
Against disinclination…later in the day…
All that remains…the extremely brittle foliage…
Abated, the thunder…our golden figure…
Her ugly hair held back by a pin…frenzied
Rushed down the forested hill that isolates sun
Highly explosive, flickering, foiling of your heightening hushed
Nick in the blue thing
Along negligence
 
Chagrin
Of the maidens
Bleeds
 
Shackled as sharp complication
Being as it were
Absorbed into
Myth
Whiten, whitening
Or white on white display
 
That play
That combusted
On stage
 
Romulus
& Remus
 
The Janus figure
From Zaire
 
(curtain)
~~~
I dwell in Possibility –
A fairer House than Prose –
More numerous of Windows –
Superior – for Doors –
Of Chambers as the Cedars –
Impregnable of eye –
And for an everlasting Roof
The Gambrels of the Sky –
Of Visitors – the fairest –
For Occupation – This –
The spreading wide my narrow Hands
To gather Paradise –
~~~
We are a sad people, without hats. The history of our nation is tragically benign. We like to watch the rabbits screwing in the graveyard. We are fond of the little bunny with the bent ear who stands alone in the moonlight reading what little text there is on the graves. He looks quite desirable like that. He looks like the center of the universe. Look how his mouth moves mouthing the words while the others are busy making more of him. Soon the more will ask of him to write their love letters and he will oblige, using the language of our ancestors, those poor clouds in the ground, beloved by us who have been standing here for hours, a proud people after all.
~~~
There must be a Russian word to describe what has happened              between us, like ostyt, which can be usedfor a cup of  tea that is too hot, but after you walk to the next room,              and return, it is too cool; or perekhotet, which is to want something so much over months              and even years that when you get it, you have lost the desire. Pushkin said, when he saw his portrait by Kiprensky,               “It is like looking into a mirror, but one that flatters me.” What is the word for someone who looks into her friend’s face              and sees once smooth skin gone like a train that has leftthe station in Petersburg with its wide avenues and nights              at the Stray Dog Cafe, sex with the wrong men,who looked so right by candlelight, when everyone was young              and smoked hand-rolled cigarettes, painted or wroteall night but nothing good, drank too much vodka, and woke              in the painful daylight with skin like fresh cream, bookseverywhere, Lorca on Gogol, Tolstoy under Madame de Sévigné,               so that now, on a train in the taiga of  Siberia,I see what she sees — all my books alphabetized and on shelves,               feet misshapen, hands ribbed with raised veins,neck crumpled like last week’s newspaper, while her friends               are young, their skin pimply and eyes bright as puppies’,and who can blame her, for how lucky we are to be loved               for even a moment, though I can’t help but feel like Pushkin, a rough ball of  lead lodged in his gut, looking at his books               and saying, “Goodbye, my dear friends,” as those volumes close and turn back into oblong blocks, dust clouding               the gold leaf that once shimmered on their spines.
~~~
I thought once how Theocritus had sung Of the sweet years, the dear and wished for years, Who each one in a gracious hand appears To bear a gift for mortals, old or young: And, as I mused it in his antique tongue, I saw, in gradual vision through my tears, The sweet, sad years, the melancholy years, Those of my own life, who by turns had flung A shadow across me. Straightway I was 'ware, So weeping, how a mystic Shape did move Behind me, and drew me backward by the hair, And a voice said in mastery, while I strove, ... Guess now who holds thee?'—Death,' I said. But there, The silver answer rang ... Not Death, but Love.'
~~~
Saturday, April 5. Welles’s Othello:
black and white grid of rage,
steam of sheer fury spewing from the vent
of violence that followed where they went.
Wind howled on the battlements, but sun
gilded glum canals. The lovers floated
beneath black bridges, coupled in stone rooms.
The unrepentant villain (at the start
so all the rest was flashback)
dangled from a cage
squinting inscrutably at the funeral
procession winding through the town below.
The air was full of wailing.
Knives of sunlight glittered on the sea.
We lurched out onto Fifty-Seventh Street.
You said “I think I’m dying.”
Next week your eyes went out.
Shining under the lamp,
your blue gaze, now opaque,
your face drawn sharper but still beautiful:
from this extremity you can attempt
to rise to rage and grief. Or you can yield
to the cozy quicksand of the bed.
You wave your hand at walls of books:
“What do I do? Do I throw all these away?”
Their anecdotes, their comforts—now black glass.
~~~
No coward soul is mineNo trembler in the world's storm-troubled sphereI see Heaven's glories shineAnd Faith shines equal arming me from FearO God within my breastAlmighty ever-present DeityLife, that in me hast rest,As I Undying Life, have power in TheeVain are the thousand creedsThat move men's hearts, unutterably vain,Worthless as withered weedsOr idlest froth amid the boundless mainTo waken doubt in oneHolding so fast by thy infinity,So surely anchored onThe steadfast rock of Immortality.With wide-embracing loveThy spirit animates eternal yearsPervades and broods above,Changes, sustains, dissolves, creates and rearsThough earth and moon were goneAnd suns and universes ceased to beAnd Thou wert left aloneEvery Existence would exist in theeThere is not room for DeathNor atom that his might could render voidSince thou art Being and BreathAnd what thou art may never be destroyed.
~~~
“I’m interested in feminist oratory,” we think
Jess should say
“Specifically that.”
 
Yellow-breasted engine sounds on the
Joshua tree
Joshua tree mid-shimmy
 
I think every bird is mad
at me. Does that make me
an alcoholic?
 
Let’s take a break, after
the great San Bernardino sculpture party
 
sparkling toilet pieces lay tiled into
the pavilion,
silver flushers too.
 
TV piles. I am
uneasy. So what?
No match for the always sand and always
 
Air. I find a pair of leather pants
Hanging in a hut & touch them.
Definitely not leather.
 
I can see the sunscreen on your face
not rubbed in,
rivulets wet
 
the under-chin. Let’s get this next pitch
right, guys,
decades left of percolation.
 
~~~
Never think you fortune can bear the swayWhere virtue’s force can cause her to obey.
~~~
I.
The empty of stomach
manifests silence
a stillness
that levels
coffee in a cup
and in a respectful manner
allows steam to penetrate
the surface.
Reversal of action
has created my sandstone canyon
rooted cedar and sage at my feet.
This movement is where
a tranquility stems.
II.
When my child creates
bubbles through a soapy wand,
I occupy the action of fate
that bursts the perfect form.
A halcyon absorbed
nesting within
the existence of the form
that no longer exists.
The formless form
is where my mind floats.
III.
It is easy to give form
especially with English words
a promotion of mechanical ligaments
binding spirit with assembly-fabricated molds.
Just as my hair poses an appendage of my brain
my tongue poses an appendage of my heart.
I cannot classify this thought as a typewritten symbol.
An ideogram of essence
cultivates my stillness to action.
 
~~~
I have envied those   
who make something   
useful, sturdy—
a chair, a pair of boots.
Even a soup,
rich with potatoes and cream.
Or those who fix, perhaps,
a leaking window:
strip out the old cracked putty,
lay down cleanly the line of the new.
You could learn,
the mirror tells me, late at night,   
but lacks conviction.
One reflected eyebrow quivers a little.
I look at this
borrowed apartment—
everywhere I question it,
the wallpaper’s pattern matches.
Yesterday a woman
showed me
a building shaped
like the overturned hull of a ship,
its roof trusses, under the plaster,
lashed with soaked rawhide,
the columns’ marble
painted to seem like wood.
Though possibly it was the other way around?
I look at my unhandy hand,
innocent,
shaped as the hands of others are shaped.   
Even the pen it holds is a mystery, really.Rawhide, it writes,   
and chair, and marble.Eyebrow.
Later the woman asked me—
I recognized her then,
my sister, my own young self—Does a poem enlarge the world,   
or only our idea of the world?
~~~
                       He is pruning the privet
                of sickly sorrow   desolation
           in loose pieces of air he goes clip clip clip
       the green blooming branches fall—‘they’re getting out
             of hand’    delirious and adorable    what a switch
                               we perceive        multiple
identities     when you sing     so beautifully     the shifting
       clouds  You are not alone is this world
               not a lone  a parallel world of reflection
       in a window keeps the fire burning
                    in the framed mandala,  the red shafted flicker
               sits on the back of the garden chair in the rain
the red robed monks downtown in the rain  a rainbow arises
                   simple country      practices thunder
      lightning,  hail and rain    eight Douglas Iris
            ribbon layers of attention
              So   constant creation of ‘self’ is a tricky
       mess    He is pruning the loquat,   the olive
     which looks real enough in the damp late morning air
                                                                                          May 15, 1995
~~~
The American public is patient,
 The American public is slow,The American public will stand as much
 As any public I know.We submit to be killed by our railroads,
 We submit to be fooled by our press,We can stand as much government scandal
 As any folks going, I guess,We can bear bad air in the subway,
 We can bear quick death in the street,But we are a little particular
 About the things we eat.It is not so much that it kills us --
 We are used to being killed;But we like to know what fills us
 When we pay for being filledWhen we pay the Beef Trust prices,
 As we must, or go without,It is not that we grudge the money
 But we grudge the horrid doubt.Is it ham or trichinosis?
 Can a label command belief?Is it pork we have purchased, or poison?
 Is it tuberculosis or beef?There is really a choice of diseases,
 To any one, little or big;And no man really pleases
 To die of a long dead pig.We take our risks as we’re able,
 On elevator and train,But to sit in peace at the table
 And to be seized with sudden painWhen we are at home and happy --Is really against the grain.And besides admitting the poison,
 Admitting we all must die,Accepting the second-hand sickness
 From a cholera-smitten stye;Patiently bearing the murder,
 Amiable, meek, inert, —We do rise up and remonstrate
 Against the Packingtown dirt.Let there be death in the dinner,
 Subtle and unforeseen,But O, Mr. Packer, in packing our death,
 Won’t you please to pack it clean!
~~~
Whenever my father was left with nothing to do —
      waiting for someone to 'get ready',
or facing the gap between graduate seminars
      and dull after-suppers in his study
grading papers or writing a review —
      he played the piano.
I think of him packing his lifespan
      carefully, like a good leather briefcase,
each irritating chore wrapped in floating passages
      for the left hand and right hand
by Chopin or difficult Schumann;
      nothing inside it ever rattled loose.
Not rationalism, though you could cut your tongue
      on the blade of his reasonable logic.
Only at the piano did he become
      the bowed, reverent, wholly absorbed Romantic.
The theme of his heroic, unfinished piano sonata
      could have been Brahms.
Boredom, or what he disapproved of as
      'sitting around with your mouth open'
oddly pursued him. He had small stamina.
      Whenever he succumbed to bouts of winter bronchitis,
the house sank a little into its snowed-up garden,
      missing its musical swim-bladder.
None of this suggests how natural he was.
      For years I thought fathers played the piano
just as dogs barked and babies grew.
      We children ran in and out of the house,
taking for granted that the 'Trout' or E flat Major Impromptu
      would be rippling around us.
For him, I think, playing was solo flying, a bliss
      of removal, of being alone.
Not happily always; never an escape,
      for he was affectionate, and the household hum
he pretended to find trivial or ridiculous
      daily sustained him.
When he talked about music, it was never
      of the lachrimae rerum
that trembled from his drawn-out phrasing
      as raindrops phrase themselves along a wire;
no, he defended movable doh or explained the amazing
      physics of the octave.
We'd come in from school and find him
      cross-legged on the jungle of the floor,
guts from one of his Steinways strewn about him.
      He always got the pieces back in place.
I remember the yellow covers of Schirmer's Editions
      and the bound Peters Editions in the bookcase.
When he defected to the cello in later years
      Grandmother, in excrucio, mildly exclaimed,
'Wasn't it lovely when Steve liked to play the piano.'
      Now I'm the grandmother listening to Steve at the piano.
Lightly, in strains from Brahms-Haydn variations,
      his audible image returns to my humming ears.
~~~
Billie Holiday was on the radio

I was standing in the kitchen

smoking my cigarette of this

pack I plan to finish tonight

last night of smoking youth.

I made a cup of this funny

kind of tea I’ve had hanging

around. A little too sweet

an odd mix. My only impulse

was to make it sweeter.

Ivy Anderson was singing

pretty late tonight

in my very bright kitchen.

I’m standing by the tub

feeling a little older

nearly thirty in my very

bright kitchen tonight.

I’m not a bad looking woman

I suppose     O it’s very quiet

in my kitchen tonight        I’m squeezing

this plastic honey bear      a noodle

of honey dripping into the odd sweet

tea. It’s pretty late

Honey bear’s cover was loose

and somehow honey      dripping down

the bear’s face   catching

in the crevices beneath

the bear’s eyes    O very sad and sweet

I’m standing in my kitchen     O honey

I’m staring at the honey bear’s face.
~~~
“It isn’t a game for girls,”
he said, grabbing a fifth
with his right hand,
the wind with his left.
“For six days
I raced Jack Daniels.
He cheated, told jokes.
Some weren’t even funny.
That’s how come he won.
It took a long time
to reach this Yellow River.
I’m not yet thirty,
or is it thirty-one?
Figured all my years
carried the same hard thaw.
Out here, houselights hid
deep inside the trees.
For awhile I believed this road
cut across to Spring Creek
and I was trucking home.
I could kid you now,
say I ran it clean,
gasping on one lung,
loaded by a knapsack
of distrust and hesitation.
I never got the tone
in all the talk of cure.
I sang Honor Songs, crawled
the railroad bridge to Canada.
Dizzy from the ties,
I hung between both worlds.
Clans of blackbirds circled
the nearby maple trees.
The dark heart of me said
no days more than these.
As sundown kindled the sumacs,
stunned by the river’s smile,
I had no need for heat,
no need to feel ashamed.
Inside me then the sound
of burning leaves. Tell them
I tumbled through a gap on the horizon.
No, say I stumbled through a hummock
and fell in a pit of stars.
When rain weakened my stride,
I heard them singing
in a burl of white ash,
took a few more days to rave
at them in this wood.
Then their appaloosas nickered
in the dawn and they came
riding down a close ravine.
Though the bottle was empty,
I still hung on. Foxtails beat
the grimace from my brow
until I took off my pain
like a pair of old boots.
I became a hollow horn filled
with rain, reflecting everything.
The wind in my hand
burned cold as hoarfrost
when my grandfather nudged me
and called out
my Lakota name.”
               In memory of Mato Heholgeca’s grandson
~~~
Please! Keep
reading me
Blake
because you’re going to make
me the greatest
poet of
all time
Keep smoothing
the stones in the
driveway
let me fry an egg
on your ass
& I’ll pick up
the mail.
I feel your
absence in
the morning
& imagine your
instant mouth
let me move
in with you—
Travelling
wrapping your limbs
on my back
I grow man woman
Child
I see wild wild wild
Keep letting the
day be massive
Unlicensed
Oh please have
my child
      I’m a little
      controlling
      Prose has some
      Magic. Morgan
had a
whore in
her lap. You
Big fisherman
I love my
Friends.
I want to lean
my everything
with you
make home for your hubris
I want to read the words you circld over and over again
A slow skunk walking across the road
Yellow, just kind
of pausing
picked up the warm
laundry. I just saw a coyote
tippy tippy tippy
I didn’t tell you about the creature with hair
long hair, it was hit by cars on the highway
Again and again. It had long grey hair
It must’ve been a dog; it could’ve been
Ours. Everyone loses their friends.
I couldn’t tell anyone about this sight.
Each defeat
Is sweet.
~~~
She need not be selfish but he may add   
They like my way it is partly mine
In which case for them to foil or not please   
Come which they may they may in June.   
Not having all made plenty by their wish   
In their array all which they plan
Should they be called covered by which   
It is fortunately their stay that they may   
In which and because it suits them to fan
Not only not with clover but with may it matter   
That not only at a distance and with nearly   
That they ran for which they will not only plan   
But may be rain can be caught by the hills   
Just as well as they can with what they have   
And they may have it not only because of this   
But because they may be here.
Or is it at all likely that they arrange what they like.
Nohody knows just why they are or are not anxious   
While they sit and watch the horse which rests
Not because he is tired but because they are waiting
To say will they wait with them in their way   
Only to say it relieves them that they go away   
This is what they feel when they like it
Most of them do or which
It is very often their need not to be either
Just why they are after all made quickly faster   
Just as they might do.
It is what they did say when they mentioned it   
Or this.
It is very well to go up and down and look more   
Than they could please that they see where   
It is better that they are there
~~~
“and then looks at
the stars” from the
bed in the ambulance
 
looks up at boughs of
trees shifting quickly
lit in blackness
 
blackening soft, deep
siren’s song—she died
several times that night
 
and only in the weeks
to come started and
started to come back
 
then forward which is
real life
~~~
Extract the juice which is itself a Light.
Pulp,   manna,   gentle
                    Theriasin, ergot
like mold on flame, these red leaves
bursting
                    from mesquite by the side
of dry creekbed.         Extract
the tar, the sticky
substance
                    heart
                                of things
(each plant a star,        extract
the juice of stars
                                by circular stillation
smear
            the inner man w/the coction
till he burn
            like worms of light in quicksilver
not the false
            puffballs of marshfire,      extract
the heart of the empty heart
                     it is full
of the star soul that paces fierce
in the deeps of earth
                       the Red Man,
                                                 healer
in furs
            who carries a club
who carries
             the pale homunculus
in his belly.
                         For you are angel, you call
the soul from plants
                      or pearls of ambergris
out of the grudging sea.
                       Extract arcanum.  Separate
true Archeus from the false
                       the bitter
is not less potent—nor does clarity
bespeak truth.
                        Out of the heart of the ineffable
draw the black flecks of matter
                               & from these
the cold, blue fire.
                               Dry water.   Immerse
yourself
              though it be but a drop.
                                                           This Iliaster
flowers like the wind.
               Out of the ash, the Eidolon of the world
Crystalline.
                  Perfect.
~~~
Sit still, and hear the last of our sea-sorrow.
—The Tempest 



The only potion I saw him brew was tea
of his own blend, a mash of leaves and bark.   
Good for whatever ailed you was his claim,
as if he could see the leaps and falls
he’d named “the heart.” Who knows?
                                                    For argument,   
just say he had no need, had made me up:
one in his likeness, who wouldn’t touch the stuff.   
Who tried to see a window where he outlined   
in air its air of distance, ladylike,
a pane designed to cut you off from the world   
of the dunghill and the worm.
Who fashioned a cloak of leaves that aped his cape,   
mine only as magic as waterproof, a screen   
against the downpour day after day of sun,   
unlike the one he wrapped in and became   
no longer Father but some other, a stranger—
the island’s only one—the local god,   
or was it merely King of Somewhere Else?
Or mother country, I his colony?
He held forth promise of some other isle,   
no drier but more “cultivated,” not   
just with crops but with quotation marks.
How he held forth, dutiful silence mine to guard.   
I borrowed foreign names from the remains   
of a map that washed ashore, my own worn out
through under-use. So, Carolina North,   
or South? Virginia West?
                                    As long as I
remembered not to answer to “Miranda!”,   
the call of parent bird to fledgling ingrate,   
then I was not the heir apparent but   
your normal castaway, a little bored
with ins and outs of tidepools’ smelly courts.
Perhaps not world enough, but I had time   
to watch a hermit crab align himself
and back into a vacant whelk and haul
the home he wore from rocky A to B.
All that watching—watching for what? A sail   
blown off its course by my uncalled-for sighs?
A gorgeous morning, same as yesterday,
I in the same old shirt he’d handed down,   
divining rightly that if it failed to fit,   
a scabbard’s belt would cinch it as a dress.
To the crab’s new quarters a small limpet clung.   
What did I want to be? What did I know   
but him, the man who’d loved his subjects less   
than his library, who’d lost his kingdom, who   
couldn’t put down a book he’d yet to finish?
How close the air remote upon that isle,   
the like of which I have not breathed again.   
How it held water, building up a wall   
by keeping molecules apart. How close   
those castles, not to be counted on except
to rumble, then to wilt late afternoons,   
all squandered weakness.
                                     Whatever I had sensed
about my difference I caught from him   
or from the books he carried in his head.   
Such dreams he made on me.
I am a leaf torn loose from his drowned book.
All men are islands, though they swear otherwise.   
All islands are alike in their unhappiness.
~~~
The last time I saw father alive he was using
a black umbrella, closed, to beat off some pigeons
hanging outside the marble portals of a museum.
We were visitors, walking very slowly, so father
could stoop and examine everything. We had not been
in the museum, but were resting on its steps.
We saw it all—the fountains, the statues, the parks
and the post office. Cities are made of such things.
Once we encountered a wedding coming out of the cathedral
and were caught in a shower of rice; as the bride
flicked her veiled head father licked his little finger
and in this way saved a grain. On the next block
he announced he was going to heaven. But first let’s
go back to the hotel and rest, he said: I want my mint.
Those were practically his last words. And what did I want
more than anything in the world? Probably the ancient Polish
recipe for blood soup, which was finally told to me
in an empty deli in a deserted mill town in western Massachusetts
by the owner’s mother, who was alone one day when I burst
in and demanded a bowl. But, she said, lacing her fingers
around a jar of morello cherries, it requires one cup of
new blood drawn from the goose whose neck you’ve just wrung
to put in the pot, and where in these days can I find
anything as fresh as that? I had lost track of my life
before, but nothing prepared me for the onslaught of
wayfarer’s bliss when she continued to list, one
by one, the impossible ingredients I needed to live.
We sat at the greasy table far into the night, while
snow fell on the locked doors of the church next door,
dedicated to St. Stanislas, which was rumored to be
beautiful inside, and contain the remains of his beloved head.
~~~
The rain whistled.
 
A taxi brought me to your apartment building
And there I stood.
 
I had dreamed a dream
Of us in a bedroom.
The light shining upon us in white sheets.
 
You were singing me a song of your sailing days
And in the dream
I reached deep in you and pulled out a cardinal
Which in bright red
Flew out the window.
 
Sometimes when we talk
On the phone, I think to myself
That the deep perfect of your soul
Is what draws me to you.
But still what soul is perfect?
All souls are misshapen and off-colored.
Morning comes within a soul
And makes it obey another law
In which all souls are snowflakes.
 
Once at a funeral, a man had died
And with the prayers said, his soul flew up in a hurry
Like it had been let out of something awful.
It was strangely colored, that soul.
And it was a funny shape and a funny temperature.
As it blew away, all of us looking felt the cold.
~~~
 
~~~
But keep writing.
Write by the glow of the windows,
the roof alight
like a red-haired girl,
you in the back yard, safe.
 
The ladybug's flown away.
Recall her flit and armored crawl.
To the last breath of summer.
Upon the circular of winter.
 
The man may have left.
This doesn't stop
the writing. Between
the pages, a slight blur.
The man may have been old
and ill, or young
who stopped trying
to be with you.
Ghost days.
 
You're swimming across
a deep lake with a soul
you're making.
You save the swimmer,
the sailor,
the drowned,
the damned
and the beloved.
~~~
                               Where are the days of Tobias,
when one of you, veiling his radiance, stood at the front door,
slightly disguised for the journey, no longer appalling.
— Rainer Maria Rilke, tr. by Stephen Mitchell



The fresco cracks cooperatively over time. Not to give a secret away
but gradually to break off keeping it. In the sky you make birds
like this, one wing longer than the other, an asymmetrical v
wedged against wind, one stroke longer than another,
never the bodies turned the same direction, each finding
its own angle, and one, in the distance,
a dot. These are the Deadly Birds of the Soul
Rilke was forced to call terrifying.
Migratory, weighing no more than a pencil.
Because every flying thing is passionate, and every flight
a posture torn from stone.
There was a time it was a theme
parents would pay an artist to realize — the face of a beloved son,
a Luca or Piero, painted onto the shoulders of Tobias,
painted into the company of Raphael. You tell yourselves
and your quiet house
no harm will come to the boy
as he goes out. A guardian, though, is not a guard. To keep safe
is subtly different from confining. Radiance can strategically
direct itself to seem like us, ready, as it were, to walk.
As a mirror goes through the appearance of requiring
subsistence, goes through the motions of a meal
whose food appears to be food.
Radiance, we know, is never quite as warm as light.
Who has not tasted the silver in sea mist?
Whosever they are, angels are the first to surface there.
You know a guardian by the silver of a river-crossing,
of a father’s filmy eyes, in gall, heart, fire,
and mostly smoke. In smoke and mostly mirror.
As, wedged between forward and backward being,
rehashing and planning ahead, presence will be specked again
with being erased, a reusable writing surface
calling down to the life without rest, the self-propelled
surveillances of sharks.
~~~
As we sat at the feet of the string quartet,  in their living room, on a winter night,  through the hardwood floor spurts and gulps  and tips and shudders came up, and the candle-scent  air was thick-alive with pearwood,  ebony, spruce, poplar, and horse  howled, and cat skreeled, and then,  when the Grösse Fugue was around us, under us,  over us, in us, I felt I was hearing  the genes of my birth-family, pulled, keening  and grieving and scathing, along each other,  scraping and craving, I felt myself held in that  woods of hating longing, and I knew  and knew myself, and my parents, and their parents,  there—and then, at a distance, I sensed,  as if it were thirty years ago,  a being, far off yet, oblique-approaching,  straying toward, and then not toward,  and then toward this place, like a wandering dreaming  herdsman, my husband. And I almost wanted  to warn him away, to call out to him  to go back whence he came, into some calmer life,  but his beauty was too moving to me,  and I wanted too much to not be alone, in the  covert, any more, and so I prayed him  come to me, I bid him hasten, and good welcome.
~~~
At night the states
I forget them or I wish I was there
          in that one under the
Stars. It smells like June in this night
          so sweet like air.
I may have decided that the
          States are not that tired
Or I have thought so. I have
          thought that.
At night the states
And the world not that tired
          of everyone
Maybe. Honey, I think that to
          say is in
light. Or whoever. We will
          never
replace you. We will never re-
          place You. But
in like a dream the floor is no   
          longer discursive
To me it doesn’t please me by
          being the vistas out my
window, do you know what
          Of course (not) I mean?
I have no dreams of wake-
          fulness. In
wakefulness. And so to begin.
          (my love.)
At night the states
talk. My initial continuing contr-
          diction
my love for you & that for me
deep down in the Purple Plant the oldest
          dust
of it is sweetest but states no longer
          how I
would feel. Shirt
that shirt has been in your arms
          And I have
that shirt is how I feel
At night the states
will you continue in this as-
          sociation of
matters, my Dearest? down
          the street from
where the public plaque reminds
          that of private
loving the consequential chain
          trail is
matters
At night the states
that it doesn’t matter that I don’t
          say them, remember
them at the end of this claustro-
          phobic the
dance, I wish I could see I wish
          I could
dance her. At this night the states
          say them
out there. That I am, am them
          indefinitely so and
so wishful passive historic fated
          and matter-
simple, matter-simple, an
          eyeful. I wish
but I don’t and little melody.
          Sorry that these
little things don’t happen any
          more. The states
have drained their magicks
          for I have not
seen them. Best not to tell. But
          you
you would always remain, I   
          trust, as I will
always be alone.
At night the states
whistle. Anyone can live. I
can. I am not doing any-
          thing doing this. I
discover I love as I figure. Wed-
          nesday
I wanted to say something in
          particular. I have been
where. I have seen it. The God
          can. The people
do some more.
At night the states
I let go of, have let, don’t
          let
Some, and some, in Florida, doing.
          What takes you so
long? I am still with you in that
          part of the
park, and vice will continue, but
          I’ll have
a cleaning Maine. Who loses
          these names
loses. I can’t bring it up yet,
          keeping my
opinions to herself. Everybody in
          any room is a
smuggler. I walked fiery and   
          talked in the
stars of the automatic weapons
          and partly for you
Which you. You know.
At night the states
have told it already. Have
          told it. I
know it. But more that they
          don’t know, I
know it too.
At night the states
whom I do stand before in
          judgment, I
think that they will find
          me fair, not
that they care in fact nor do
          I, right now
though indeed I am they and
          we say
that not that I’ve
          erred nor
lost my way though perhaps
          they did (did
they) and now he is dead
          but you
you are not. Yet I am this
          one, lost
again? lost & found by one-
          self
Who are you to dare sing to me?
At night the states
accompany me while I sit here
          or drums
there are always drums what for
          so I
won’t lose my way the name of
          a
personality, say, not California
          I am not
sad for you though I could be
          I remember
climbing up a hill under tall
          trees
getting home. I was
going to say that the air was
          fair (I was
always saying something like
          that) but
that’s not it now, and that
          that’s not it
isn’t it either
At night the states
dare sing to me they who seem
          tawdry
any more I’ve not thought I
          loved them, only
you it’s you whom I love
the states are not good to me as
          I am to them
though perhaps I am not
when I think of your being
          so beautiful
but is that your beauty
          or could it be
theirs I’m having such a
          hard time remembering
any of their names
your being beautiful belongs
          to nothing
I don’t believe they should
          praise you
but I seem to believe they
          should
somehow let you go
At night the states
and when you go down to
          Washington
witness how perfectly anything
          in particular
sheets of thoughts what a waste
          of sheets at
night. I remember something
          about an
up-to-date theory of time. I
          have my
own white rose for I have
          done
something well but I’m not
          clear
what it is. Weathered, perhaps
          but that’s
never done. What’s done is
          perfection.
At night the states
ride the train to Baltimore
we will try to acknowledge what was
but that’s not the real mirror
          is it? nor
is it empty, or only my eyes
          are
Ride the car home from Washington
          no
they are not. Ride the subway
          home from
Pennsylvania Station. The states
          are blind eyes
stony smooth shut in moon-
          light. My
French is the shape of this
          book
that means I.
At night the states
the 14 pieces. I couldn’t just
walk on by. Why
aren’t they beautiful enough
in a way that does not
          beg to wring
something from a dry (wet)
          something
Call my name
At night the states
making life, not explaining anything
but all the popular songs say call
          my name
oh call my name, and if I call
          it out myself to
you, call mine out instead as our
          poets do
will you still walk on by? I
          have
loved you for so long. You
          died
and on the wind they sang
          your name to me
but you said nothing. Yet you
          said once before
and there it is, there, but it is
          so still.
Oh being alone I call out my
          name
and once you did and do still in
          a way
you do call out your name
to these states whose way is to walk
on by that’s why I write too much
At night the states
whoever you love that’s who you
          love
the difference between chaos and
          star I believe and
in that difference they believed
          in some
funny way but that wasn’t
          what I
I believed that out of this
          fatigue would be
born a light, what is fatigue
there is a man whose face
          changes continually
but I will never, something
          I will
never with regard to it or
          never regard
I will regard yours tomorrow
I will wear purple will I
and call my name
At night the states
you who are alive, you who are dead
when I love you alone all night and
          that is what I do
until I could never write from your
          being enough
I don’t want that trick of making
          it be coaxed from
the words not tonight I want it
          coaxed from
myself but being not that. But I’d
          feel more
comfortable about it being words
          if it
were if that’s what it were for these
          are the
States where what words are true
          are words
Not myself. Montana, Illinois.
          Escondido.
~~~
There is a chair

the heart of which

is wooden

split five ways

and grass pressed flat

where we kissed

where others later kissed

on the same mattress

and solemn nothing

happening under a canopy—

 

Have you forgotten me?

 

I will go down wonderfully

as was told in proverbs

though for a long time I thought

I should not go.

 

Here are things that have

no Latin names

or none

that men would know.
~~~
For the earth has spoken,
to you, her magma Creole.
Full-throated syllables, up-
rising from deep down,
an honest elocution —
rudimentary sound: guttural
nouns, forthright, strong,
the rumbled conviction of verbs
unfettered by reticence
as the first poetry of creation.
A secret has passed between you
so wonderfully terrible,
it laid your cities prostrate,
raptured your citizenry.
Now, we look to your remnant
courtesy cable TV
and garble theories thinking
ourselves saved.
Only the wise among us pin
our ears to the ground,
listening in hope of catching
even a half syllable
of the language forming
like a new world on your tongue.
~~~
I have never needed God
as a personal savior
in my practical life
syllogisms about His existence
were never music to my ears
but always seemed vague
missing a dimension although I didn’t know how to say this.
Neither a philosophical God nor a biblical God
suddenly appears among His creations
amid revelations of wisdom in Jerusalem, His city.
And certainly not in disclosures of pious inner principles
and also not among poets, unfortunately.
Astronomical bodies at night and mystical landscapes in Sharafat for example
and Beit Jala
bear His between-the-lines existence,
His inklings.
The expression of an ultra-Orthodox man’s eyes in Mea She’arim — 
this too — 
and even the purifying surrender of a sly and seasoned merchant, irreligious now in Geula,
when you reproach him.
Something like “Reprove a wise man and he will love you.”
And you, when you cleanse yourself of anxious constraints about your environment
after taking hash or grass.
Springs of purity whose origins you’re unaware of
bubble in coursing blood, in glands, in milk
and some paradisiacal primeval revelation,
and your almost subconscious innerness
your being suddenly revealed — 
Is this clear enough to you, heredity? Genes?
Or existential uniqueness, a maintained infancy that knocks you out with a sense of a refreshing genesis.
Everything becomes clear in a great light.
You shed revulsion and resistance,
a great love germinates within you — 
this gloriousness this wonder
comprised of
absolutes of — 
objective truth, complete justice, decency
honor internalized
honesty and complex wisdom enhanced down to the last detail.
Ho, complete, divine purity.
Suddenly you polish a syllogism of your own
for decisive proof of His existence:
God is an idea — 
ideas don’t have material existence
but they exist nonetheless
so God exists definitively as the spirit of an idea,
the biblical assertion “He has no body and no bodily form”
is clear to me now as an exegesis
that sits well with philosophy.
 
 Translated from the Hebrew
~~~
He described her mouth as full of ashes.
So when he kissed her finally
he was thinking about ashes
and the blacker rim just below
the edge of the ashtray,
and the faint dark rim that outlined her lips,
and the lips themselves, at the limit
of another darkness, farther
and far more interior.
Then the way the red,
paling, just outside those lines
caught fire and the pages caught
soon after that. Slowly at first,
but then all at once
at the scalloped brown corners of each;
like the ruff of an offended and darkening bird,
extended, then folded
in on itself; multiple,
stiffening, gone.
~~~
The     silver           hour drops— a spider on the mirror.           * Silver the hour like drops of a spider’s mirror.           * The silver drops, the spider’s hour, the mirror . . .
~~~
When we go out into the fields of learning
We go by a rough route
Marked by colossal statues, Frankenstein's
Monsters, AMPAC and the 704,
AARDVARK, and deoxyribonucleic acid.
They guard the way.
Headless they nod, wink eyeless,
Thoughtless compute, not heartless,
For they figure us, they figure
Our next turning.
They are reading the book to be written.
As we start out
At first daylight into the fields, they are saying,Starting out.
In every sage leaf is contained a toad
Infinitely small.
Carbonized grains of wheat unearthed
From the seventh millennium B.C. town of Jarmo
In the Tigris-Euphrates basin
Match the grains of three kinds of wheat still extant,
Two wild, one found only in cultivation.
The separate grains
Were parched and eaten,
Or soaked into gruel, yeasted, fermented.
Took to the idea of bread,
Ceres, while you were gone.
Wind whistles in the smokey thatch,
Oven browns its lifted loaf,
And in the spring the nourished seeds,
Hybrid with wild grass,
Easily open in a hundred days,
And seeded fruits, compact and dry,
Store well together.
They make the straw for beds,
They ask the caring hand to sow, the resting foot
To stay, to court the seasons.
Basil: hatred: king over pain.
What did you do on the last day of day camp?
First we did games, running around and playing.
Then we did crafts, making things.
Then we did nature, what goes on and on.
Eventually a number
Of boys have got big enough
Through all the hazards of drag-racing, theft, and probation,
To start for junior college, two transfers away,
Mysterious as Loch Ness.
While of grandmothers a number
Have stooping arrived to seventy or eighty
And wave the boys on, shaking
With more absentminded merriment than they have mustered
In half a century.
King Henry the Eighth consumed many daisies
In an attempt to rid himself of ulcers.
Algebra written across a blackboard hurts
As a tight shoe hurts; it can't be walked in.
Music, a song score, hurts,
How far lies one note from another?
Graft hurts, its systems of exploitation
In cold continuance.
Argosies of design, fashions to which the keys
Rest restlessly in an Egyptian tomb.
In every sage leaf is contained a toad
Infinitely small.
~~~
My heart is bleeding. It bleeds upward and fills
my mouth up with salt. It bleeds because of a city in ruins,
the chair still warm from sister's body,
because it will all be irreproducible. My heart
bleeds because of baby bear not finding mama bear and it bleeds
to the tips of my fingers like I painted my nails Crimson.
Sometimes my heart bleeds so much I am a raisin.
It bleeds until I am a quivering ragged clot, bleeds at the ending
with the heroine and her sunken cancer eyes, at the ending
with the plaintive flute over smoke-choked killing fields. I'm bleeding
a river of blood right now and it's wearing a culvert in me for the blood. My heart
rises up in me, becomes the cork of me and I choke on it. I am bleeding
for you and for me and for the tiny babies and the IED-blown
leg. It bleeds because I'm made that way, all filled up with blood,
my sloppy heart a sponge filled with blood to squeeze onto 
any circumstance. Because it is mine, it will always bleed.
My heart bled today. It bled onto the streets
and the steps of city hall. It bled in the pizza parlor with the useless jukebox.
I've got so much blood to give inside and outside of any milieu.
Even for a bad zoning decision, I'll bleed so much you'll be bleeding,
all of us bleeding in and out like it's breathing,
or kissing, and because it is righteous and terrible and red.
 
~~~
if you like let the body feel
all its own evolution
inside, opening flagella
& feathers & fingers
door by door, a ragged
 
neuron dangling like
a participle to
hear a bare sound
 
on the path, find
a red-eye-hole rabbit, fat
of the bulbous stalk pecked out
to the core so you can
 
bore back to the salamander you
once were straggling under the skin
grope toward the protozoa
snagging on the rise toward placental knowing
 
who developed eyes for you agape in open waters
 
the worm that made a kidney-like chamber burrows in
directing your heart leftward in nodal cascade, slow at your
hagfish spine who
 
will bury your bones
investigate a redwood rain or tap
the garnet of your heartwood, bark, put
your flat needles on dry ice to inquire
after your tree family, father or mother in the fairy-ring
next to you, find you
are most closely related to grass
your hexaploid breathing pores gently closing at night, when
did you begin your coexistence with flowering
plants from which arose the bee before the
African honey badger but after the dark
protoplanetary disk of dust grains
surrounding the sun become
the earth you
had no nouns, did you
 
~~~
I was reading Jeffrey Goldberg’s new piece
In The Atlantic — it was the one about
President Obama’s decision not
To be persuaded by a commonplace
That our credibility hinges on the use
Of swift and massive lethal force despite
Pressure even from his own Cabinet
Appalled that Assad shelled Ghouta with sarin gas — 
When I thought of your poem on the way
Of denial, “Via Negativa,” whose lines
Celebrated their (your rhyme) reticence.
Why am I even talking this way to you?
I watched you being buried, yet in the end
I wonder if I had ever been your friend.
~~~
A white hunter is nearly crazy.
~~~
Where is the word I want?
Groping
in the thicket,
about to pinch the
dangling
berry, my fingerpads
close on
air.
I can hear it
scrabbling like a squirrel
on the oak's far side.
 
Word, please send over this black stretch of ocean
your singular flare,
blaze
your topaz in the mind's blank.
I could always pull the gift
from the lucky-dip barrel,
scoop the right jewel
from my dragon's trove....
Now I flail,
the wrong item creaks up
on the mental dumbwaiter.
No use—
it's turning
out of sight,
a bicycle down a
Venetian alley—
I clatter after, only to find
gondolas bobbing in sunny silence,
a pigeon mumbling something
I just can't catch.
~~~
From "Shorter Chaucer Tales" (2006)



The great labour of appearanceServed the making of the pyre. But how Nor howHow alsoHow theyShal nat be tooldShall not be told.Nor how the godsNor how the beestes and the birds Nor how the ground agastNor how the fire First with strawAnd then with drye And then with grene And then with goldAnd thenNow how a site is laid like this.Nor whatNor howNor howNor what she spak nor what was her desirNor what jewelsWhen the fireNor how some threw their And some their And their And cups full of wine and milk And bloodInto the fyrInto the fire.Nor how three times And three times withAnd three times how.
~~~
National Pigeon Association, England, 1940



Notch.
Web.
And then,
down the shaft,
lesser wing coverts
and marginal coverts, and soft,
greater underwing coverts — although never as great
as greater under-primary
coverts, gray-coated
and down-plumped,
trailing
what
might
reveal
a pattern
just over the down
that might support a secrecy.
Launched from double-decker buses, or attic windows,
or the dark roofs at Bletchley Park,
the lesser pigeons,
always first
to find
the
fray,
sport black
metallic
canisters strapped to
matted lapel feathers. And tucked
inside, like Russian dolls, a cipher’s hollow chambers — 
down and down, a Fibonacci
spiral, a paper
nautilus
of words
and
codes
and keys
that shift with
each decipherment.The bard is in the wand — read space
as shape, read a as i — the key takes subterfuge,
that doubling, double agency
when tomfoolery
is crossed with
rage. But
these
are
simply
carriers,
word-burdened, instinct-
tossed, searching for the perch within
a blasted atmosphere. Find forms, the message says, and
everything will fall in line.The bird is in the
wind
~~~
Whenever I look
out at the snowy
mountains at this hour
and speak directly
into the ear of the sky,
it’s you I’m thinking of.
You’re like the spirits
the children invent
to inhabit the stuffed horse
and the doll.
I don’t know who hears me.
I don’t know who speaks
when the horse speaks.
~~~
Some things no one says aloud.
But he was there if he says he was.
Bleaching fields and buttermilk.
The stench of breweries and lye.
Two-thirds of his life before this one? Sky.
His current city rises off a river not Lek,
though here in the gallery, a train ride away:
The impossible familiar. The somehow known.
The curator has written:On the crowded ferry, cows attempt to drink. 
But anyone can see that one scratches her neck,
a good-sailor cow, sickle-hocked, not parched.
Cows like that. Yes. He remembers.
Also that, downriver, float the fishmongers’ baskets
of haddock and crab.
On the way home, this will be also his view,
the river running toward its source, a reverse birthing.
But now, he sees that Rembrandt has wired coils of light
into the shipbuilder’s ruff.
He remembers shipbuilders, the horizon
upon which sailed their fluyts, and above which: homesick.
That was what we call a long time ago
because it has to be called something.
And now? The guard warns him back from one world.
Rose hip. Willow. Sea salt.       The infinite clouds.
~~~
To invent the alef-beit,
decipher the grammar of crows,
read a tangle of bare branches
with vowels of the last leaves
scrawling their jittery speech
on the sky’s pale page.
 
Choose a beginning.
See what God yields and dirt cedes
when tines disturb fescue, vetch, and sage,
when your hand dips grain from a sack,
scattering it among engraved furrows.
 
Beyond the hill, a plume of dust
where oxen track the hours.
Does God lead or follow or scout?
To answer, count to one again and again:
a red maple leaf and a yellow maple leaf
that wind rifles and rain shines until they let go,
blazing their scripted nothingness on air.
~~~
The poet pursues his beautiful theme;The preacher his golden beatitude;
  And I run after a vanishing dream—
  The glittering, will-o’-the-wispish gleamOf the properly scholarly attitude—The highly desirable, the very advisable,The hardly acquirable, properly scholarly attitude.
  I envy the savage without any clothes,Who lives in a tropical latitude;
  It’s little of general culture he knows.
  But then he escapes the worrisome woesOf the properly scholarly attitude—The unceasingly sighed over, wept over, cried over,The futilely died over, properly scholarly attitude.
  I work and I work till I nearly am dead,And could say what the watchman said—that I could!
  But still, with a sigh and a shake of the head,
  “You don’t understand,” it is ruthlessly said,“The properly scholarly attitude—The aye to be sought for, wrought for and fought for,The ne’er to be caught for, properly scholarly attitude—”
  I really am sometimes tempted to sayThat it’s merely a glittering platitude;
  That people have just fallen into the way,
  When lacking a subject, to tell of the swayOf the properly scholarly attitude—The easily preachable, spread-eagle speechable,In practice unreachable, properly scholarly attitude.
~~~
Tell me,
Was Venus more beautiful
Than you are,
When she topped
The crinkled waves,
Drifting shoreward
On her plaited shell?
Was Botticelli’s vision
Fairer than mine;
And were the painted rosebuds   
He tossed his lady
Of better worth
Than the words I blow about you
To cover your too great loveliness   
As with a gauze
Of misted silver?
For me,
You stand poised
In the blue and buoyant air,
Cinctured by bright winds,
Treading the sunlight.
And the waves which precede you   
Ripple and stir
The sands at my feet.
~~~
November wind. The feeling of knowing
something before you said it, all over everything.
As in, shadow take me into the side of the mountain.
As in, open up the earth and get inside.
Leaving doesn't mean much. Arriving
means everything, how you came to be where you were,
even if later it will hurt to think of it.
And the forgotten, aren't they always
the most remembered elsewhere, before they perish,when someone has their eye on them,and later when the shrines are madewith local flowers and icons of heroes, rosesin midsummer, angels on winter wings?I'll leave your local customs to your own imagination.Leaving, though, always a kindof unfolding of the act of staying. Last nightI knew it was the East wind not asking for me arrivingbecause the door to the kitchen blew open, lastnight, at the edge of sleep, like someone using only half the      alphabet. The book about Brecht separating at the seam because my reading had been the last one it could take before breaking into Exile and After, California in the middle, with the playwright in short sleeves, bored on the PCH, looking at the dramatic cliff work with a friend who meant well, driving, arriving at the slumlord dockyards saying at last scenery.You must forgive me or forgive the book for breaking. It was tired, you see it was a paperback, from the time people actually wanted ones like that, thought books like that should be held in hands on beaches or in cars or in cafes. Sleepy, almost sleepy, falling asleep, awake, now, I admit it, I was completely awake, listening to the wind, which I cannot      defend. Nothing in the mind but that reckless pleasure and somewhere in the book Brecht saying the truth is concrete
~~~
Force of reason, who shut up the shrill
foul Furies in the dungeon of the Parthenon,
led whimpering to the cave they live in still,
beneath the rock your city foundered on:
who, equivocating, taught revenge to sing
(or seem to, or be about to) a kindlier tune:
mind that can make a scheme of anything—
a game, a grid, a system, a mere folder
in the universal file drawer: uncompromising
mediatrix, virgin married to the welfare
of the body politic: deific contradiction,
warbonnet-wearing olive-bearer, author
of the law’s delays, you who as talisman
and totem still wear the aegis, baleful
with Medusa’s scowl (though shrunken
and self-mummified, a Gorgon still): cool
guarantor of the averted look, the guide
of Perseus, who killed and could not kill
the thing he’d hounded to its source, the dread
thing-in-itself none can elude, whose counter-
feit we halfway hanker for: aware (gone mad
with clarity) we have invented all you stand for,
though we despise the artifice—a space to savor
horror, to pre-enact our own undoing in—
living, we stare into the mirror of the Gorgon.
~~~
I am haunted by how much our mothers do not know.
How a republic falls because of its backhanded deals,
stairwell secrets. My mother does not know I am lying
with a man who is darker than me, that we do not
have names for how we truly treat our bodies.
What we do with them. The other possesses me.
Without him the perception of me fails to exist.
My mother now is taking her sheers and cutting
through live shrimp. When I was a child she peeled
each flushed grape until only the pale fleshy bead
remained. She placed them onto a plate in one shining
mound, deseeded, in front of me. How I sucked and bled
the fruit of all their juice, hypnotized in front of the buzz
of television in each version of my childhood. I am
her daughter. This is certain. I am lying down with a man
who is darker than me and maybe this poem is my
real republic, my face is my face, or is it stolen from
my mother and hung over mine? If I were a dream
you could say my countenance was a string of flickering lights
made of teeth or an expression unraveling like a carpet
into a narrow river of another life. Does truth matter
when it's floating face up or face down?
The answer to this makes all the difference.
~~~
SILLIANDER and PATCH. THOU so many favours hast receiv'd,Wondrous to tell, and hard to be believ'd,Oh ! H—— D, to my lays attention lend,Hear how two lovers boastingly contend ;Like thee successful, such their bloomy youth,Renown'd alike for gallantry and truth.St. JAMES's bell had toll'd some wretches in,(As tatter'd riding-hoods alone could sin)The happier sinners now their charms put out,And to their manteaus their complexions suit :The opera queens had finish'd half their faces,And city-dames allready taken places ;Fops of all kinds to see the Lion, run ;The beauties stay till the first act's begun,And beaux step home to put fresh linen on.No well-dress'd youth in coffee-house remain'd,But pensive PATCH, who on the window lean'd ;And SILLIANDER, that alert and gay,First pick'd his teeth, and then began to say.SILLIANDER. Why all these sighs ? ah ! why so pensive grown ?Some cause there is that thus you sit alone.Does hapless passion all this sorrow move ?Or dost thou envy where the ladies love ?PATCH. If, whom they love, my envy must pursue,'Tis sure, at least, I never envy You.SILLIANDER. No, I'm unhappy, You are in the right,'Tis You they favour, and 'tis Me they slight.Yet I could tell, but that I hate to boast,A club of ladies where 'tis Me they toast.PATCH. Toasting does seldom any favour prove ;Like us, they never toast the thing they love.A certain Duke one night my health begun ;With chearful pledges round the room it run,Till the young SILVIA press'd to drink it too,Started, and vow'd she knew not what to do :What, drink a fellow's health ! she dy'd with shame :Yet blush'd whenever she pronounc'd my name.SILLIANDER. Ill fates pursue me, may I never findThe dice propitious, or the ladies kind,If fair Miss FLIPPY's fan I did not tear,And one from me she condescends to wear.PATCH. Women are always ready to receive ;'Tis then a favour when the sex will give.A lady (but she is too great to name)Beauteous in person, spotless is her fame,With gentle strugglings let me force this ring ;Another day may give another thing.SILLIANDER. I cou'd say something — see this billet-doux —And as for presents — look upon my shoe —These buckles were not forc'd, nor half a theft,But a young Countess fondly made the gift.PATCH. My Countess is more nice, more artful too,Affects to fly that I may fierce pursue :This snuff-box which I begg'd, she still deny'd,And when I strove to snatch it, seem'd to hide ;She laugh'd and fled, and as I sought to seize,With affectation cramm'd it down her stays :Yet hop'd she did not place it there unseen,I press'd her breasts, and pull'd it from between.SILLIANDER. Last night, as I stood ogling of her Grace,Drinking delicious poison from her face,The soft enchantress did that face decline,Nor ever rais'd her eyes to meet with mine ;With sudden art some secret did pretend,Lean'd cross two chairs to whisper to a friend,While the stiff whalebone with the motion rose,And thousand beauties to my sight expose.PATCH. Early this morn — (but I was ask'd to come)I drank bohea in CÆLIA's dressing-room :Warm from her bed, to me alone within,Her night-gown fasten'd with a single pin ;Her night-cloaths tumbled with resistless grace,And her bright hair play'd careless round her face ;Reaching the kettle, made her gown unpin,She wore no waistcoat, and her shift was thin.SILLIANDER. See TITIANA driving to the park,Hark ! let us follow, 'tis not yet too dark ;In her all beauties of the spring are seen,Her cheeks are rosy, and her mantle green.PATCH. See, TINTORETTA to the opera goes !Haste, or the crowd will not permit our bows ;In her the glory of the heav'ns we view,Her eyes are star-like, and her mantle blue.SILLIANDER. What colour does in CÆLIA's stockings shine ?Reveal that secret, and the prize is thine.PATCH. What are her garters ! tell me if you can ;I'll freely own thee for the happier man.Thus PATCH continued his heroic strain,While SILLIANDER but contends in vain.After a conquest so important gain'd,Unrival'd PATCH in ev'ry ruelle reign'd.
~~~
For Ann Lauterbach



Hemmed in by an un-
tenable image:
                 feathers planted
below fragile branches 
                 of avian feet            scaly crossroads scoring
a particular blue of sky
                 offending
through the uselessness of misplaced
                  forms                       thorny prongs
that make no sense (and yet belong)
 
                  on the ground
out of which
                  the bird wings stiffly jut
rigid as
                  rhubarb leaf.
 
                                                    Should you
kneel the body's aged mechanism
                beneath the shade of dry feathers,
 
                                                    should you
angle the vulnerable cavern
                of ear—trembling passage to psyche's
 
                failures   our fall
into suffering                           knowledge—toward the root
                                                    should youlisten        you will hear
  
                the wasted strains of an underground song
rising from the muffled beak: site of a perverse smothering
                throated core submerged
deadened by thoughtless depths
                but alive
for the dead have kept it
                safe from false music
a ghoulish guard of LOVE
 
                                                  SAFE from
                Psyche
she who
 
               bullied by the cruelty of others
the sophistication of fashionable libraries
 
             the envy of those
who would molest the world into false confessions
and banish                              all mystery
             with their dripping
candles                   she who would
unearth the birdsong                         to cage it
she who                 will end by destroying what she loves most. 
           Shhhh
~~~
for Darlene Wind and James Welch





I think of Wind and her wild ways the year we had nothing to lose and lost it anyway in the cursed country of the fox. We still talk about that winter, how the cold froze imaginary buffalo on the stuffed horizon of snowbanks. The haunting voices of the starved and mutilated broke fences, crashed our thermostat dreams, and we couldn’t stand it one more time. So once again we lost a winter in stubborn memory, walked through cheap apartment walls, skated through fields of ghosts into a town that never wanted us, in the epic search for grace.
Like Coyote, like Rabbit, we could not contain our terror and clowned our way through a season of false midnights. We had to swallow that town with laughter, so it would go down easy as honey. And one morning as the sun struggled to break ice, and our dreams had found us with coffee and pancakes in a truck stop along Highway 80, we found grace.
   
I could say grace was a woman with time on her hands, or a white buffalo escaped from memory. But in that dingy light it was a promise of balance. We once again understood the talk of animals, and spring was lean and hungry with the hope of children and corn.
   
I would like to say, with grace, we picked ourselves up and walked into the spring thaw. We didn’t; the next season was worse. You went home to Leech Lake to work with the tribe and I went south. And, Wind, I am still crazy. I know there is something larger than the memory of a dispossessed people. We have seen it.
~~~
Aphra Behn is not wearing all her clothes
in some part of South America nobody knows.
Everyone is polite, and not. Maybe she left off
her petticoats, her skirts look limp. She coughs.
Of course her bosom is bare. He's bats
 
about her, also noble and misunderstood — that’s
too much culture for you. His black
skin is just skin, what with his wealth, frisson,
and all those bearers and banners.
The play is predominant, the manor-
 
house-reach. What she makes of it — not of husbands,
not even of the rights of humans richer-than-
thou, the local gentry who scheme more
than they breed — is insolence, not to bore
us. What is real is real, she says, wearing
 
what he wants with Damn the insects biting.
His type tends to the florid—strange
how everyone speaks well of him, then how chains
become him — who says that? — and someone dies,
someone like her father who fueled a nice
 
plantation with witty wives and loneliness and slaves
enough to drive the horses into pantaloons and full sleeves—
or play. Aphra grins at us, in disrepute
as always, sailing to England on a petticoat.
~~~
The eye’s desire for relief.
I’m the tiger lily bobbing in the heat.
And also the neighbor, shaved bald and
lifting weights on the balcony. Each petal
is the receipt of a shameful dream—
a thought we hadn’t wanted to incorporate
lolling from my parted mouth.
But you know it’s mistakes that make life happen.
A cardboard suitcase of beer for the traveler.
And if we get too close to the words
on this page they soften and warp
into an animal lace, some net
whose logic won’t reveal itself. I pull our eyes
back because I love you. But then you draw them
back further still because that sounds like an excuse.
The whiny version of Love Hurts loops and curls
like ribbon through a scissor, being pulled
across the blade. The money in this poem’s
easy, if you don’t mind having no thoughts and
sitting in one place, while your body changes shape.
 
~~~
Art
what do the art
suppressors
care about art
they jump on bandwagons
wallow in press clips
& stink up the planet
with their
pornographic oppression
Art
what do they care about art
they go from being
contemporary baby kissers to
old time corrupt politicians
to self-appointed censorship clerks
who won't support art
but will support war
poverty
lung cancer
racism
colonialism
and toxic sludge
that's their morality
that's their religious conviction
that's their protection of the public
& contribution to family entertainment
what do they care about art
~~~
[Introduction] Lo now! four other acts upon the stage, Childhood, and Youth, the Manly, and Old-age. The first: son unto Phlegm, grand-child to water, Unstable, supple, moist, and cold’s his Nature. The second: frolic claims his pedigree; From blood and air, for hot and moist is he. The third of fire and choler is compos’d, Vindicative, and quarrelsome dispos’d. The last, of earth and heavy melancholy, Solid, hating all lightness, and all folly. Childhood was cloth’d in white, and given to show, His spring was intermixed with some snow. Upon his head a Garland Nature set: Of Daisy, Primrose, and the Violet. Such cold mean flowers (as these) blossom betime, Before the Sun hath throughly warm’d the clime. His hobby striding, did not ride, but run, And in his hand an hour-glass new begun, In dangers every moment of a fall, And when ‘tis broke, then ends his life and all. But if he held till it have run its last, Then may he live till threescore years or past. Next, youth came up in gorgeous attire (As that fond age, doth most of all desire), His Suit of Crimson, and his Scarf of Green. In’s countenance, his pride quickly was seen. Garland of Roses, Pinks, and Gillyflowers Seemed to grow on’s head (bedew’d with showers). His face as fresh, as is Aurora fair, When blushing first, she ‘gins to red the Air. No wooden horse, but one of metal try’d: He seems to fly, or swim, and not to ride. Then prancing on the Stage, about he wheels; But as he went, death waited at his heels. The next came up, in a more graver sort, As one that cared for a good report. His Sword by’s side, and choler in his eyes, But neither us’d (as yet) for he was wise, Of Autumn fruits a basket on his arm, His golden rod in’s purse, which was his charm. And last of all, to act upon this Stage, Leaning upon his staff, comes up old age. Under his arm a Sheaf of wheat he bore, A Harvest of the best: what needs he more? In’s other hand a glass, ev’n almost run, This writ about: This out, then I am done. His hoary hairs and grave aspect made way, And all gave ear to what he had to say. These being met, each in his equipage Intend to speak, according to their age, But wise Old-age did with all gravity To childish childhood give precedency, And to the rest, his reason mildly told: That he was young, before he grew so old. To do as he, the rest full soon assents, Their method was that of the Elements, That each should tell what of himself he knew, Both good and bad, but yet no more then’s true. With heed now stood, three ages of frail man, To hear the child, who crying, thus began. Childhood Ah me! conceiv’d in sin, and born in sorrow, A nothing, here to day, but gone to morrow, Whose mean beginning, blushing can’t reveal, But night and darkness must with shame conceal. My mother’s breeding sickness, I will spare, Her nine months’ weary burden not declare. To shew her bearing pangs, I should do wrong, To tell that pain, which can’t be told by tongue. With tears into this world I did arrive; My mother still did waste, as I did thrive, Who yet with love and all alacity, Spending was willing to be spent for me. With wayward cries, I did disturb her rest, Who sought still to appease me with her breast; With weary arms, she danc’d, and By, By, sung, When wretched I (ungrate) had done the wrong. When Infancy was past, my Childishness Did act all folly that it could express. My silliness did only take delight, In that which riper age did scorn and slight, In Rattles, Bables, and such toyish stuff. My then ambitious thoughts were low enough. My high-born soul so straitly was confin’d That its own worth it did not know nor mind. This little house of flesh did spacious count, Through ignorance, all troubles did surmount, Yet this advantage had mine ignorance, Freedom from Envy and from Arrogance. How to be rich, or great, I did not cark, A Baron or a Duke ne’r made my mark, Nor studious was, Kings favours how to buy, With costly presents, or base flattery; No office coveted, wherein I might Make strong my self and turn aside weak right. No malice bare to this or that great Peer, Nor unto buzzing whisperers gave ear. I gave no hand, nor vote, for death, of life. I’d nought to do, ‘twixt Prince, and peoples’ strife. No Statist I: nor Marti’list i’ th’ field. Where e’re I went, mine innocence was shield. My quarrels, not for Diadems, did rise, But for an Apple, Plumb, or some such prize. My strokes did cause no death, nor wounds, nor scars. My little wrath did cease soon as my wars. My duel was no challenge, nor did seek. My foe should weltering, with his bowels reek. I had no Suits at law, neighbours to vex, Nor evidence for land did me perplex. I fear’d no storms, nor all the winds that blows. I had no ships at Sea, no fraughts to loose. I fear’d no drought, nor wet; I had no crop, Nor yet on future things did place my hope. This was mine innocence, but oh the seeds Lay raked up of all the cursed weeds, Which sprouted forth in my insuing age, As he can tell, that next comes on the stage. But yet me let me relate, before I go, The sins and dangers I am subject to: From birth stained, with Adam’s sinful fact, From thence I ‘gan to sin, as soon as act; A perverse will, a love to what’s forbid; A serpent’s sting in pleasing face lay hid; A lying tongue as soon as it could speak And fifth Commandment do daily break; Oft stubborn, peevish, sullen, pout, and cry; Then nought can please, and yet I know not why. As many was my sins, so dangers too, For sin brings sorrow, sickness, death, and woe, And though I miss the tossings of the mind, Yet griefs in my frail flesh I still do find. What gripes of wind, mine infancy did pain? What tortures I, in breeding teeth sustain? What crudities my cold stomach hath bred? Whence vomits, worms, and flux have issued? What breaches, knocks, and falls I daily have? And some perhaps, I carry to my grave. Sometimes in fire, sometimes in water fall: Strangely preserv’d, yet mind it not at all. At home, abroad, my danger’s manifold That wonder ‘tis, my glass till now doth hold. I’ve done: unto my elders I give way, For ‘tis but little that a child can say. Youth My goodly clothing and beauteous skin Declare some greater riches are within, But what is best I‘ll first present to view, And then the worst, in a more ugly hue, For thus to do we on this Stage assemble, Then let not him, which hath most craft dissemble. Mine education, and my learning‘s such, As might my self, and others, profit much: With nurture trained up in virtue‘s Schools; Of Science, Arts, and Tongues, I know the rules; The manners of the Court, I likewise know, Nor ignorant what they in Country do. The brave attempts of valiant Knights I prize That dare climb Battlements, rear‘d to the skies. The snorting Horse, the Trumpet, Drum I like, The glist‘ring Sword, and well advanced Pike. I cannot lie in trench before a Town, Nor wait til good advice our hopes do crown. I scorn the heavy Corslet, Musket-proof; I fly to catch the Bullet that‘s aloof. Though thus in field, at home, to all most kind, So affable that I do suit each mind, I can insinuate into the breast And by my mirth can raise the heart deprest. Sweet Music rapteth my harmonious Soul, And elevates my thoughts above the Pole. My wit, my bounty, and my courtesy Makes all to place their future hopes on me. This is my best, but youth (is known) alas, To be as wild as is the snuffing Ass, As vain as froth, as vanity can be, That who would see vain man may look on me: My gifts abus‘d, my education lost, My woful Parents‘ longing hopes all crost; My wit evaporates in merriment; My valour in some beastly quarrel‘s spent; Martial deeds I love not, ‘cause they’re virtuous, But doing so, might seem magnanimous. My Lust doth hurry me to all that’s ill, I know no Law, nor reason, but my will; Sometimes lay wait to take a wealthy purse Or stab the man in’s own defence, that’s worse. Sometimes I cheat (unkind) a female Heir Of all at once, who not so wise, as fair, Trusteth my loving looks and glozing tongue Until her friends, treasure, and honour’s gone. Sometimes I sit carousing others’ health Until mine own be gone, my wit, and wealth. From pipe to pot, from pot to words and blows, For he that loveth Wine wanteth no woes. Days, nights, with Ruffins, Roarers, Fiddlers spend, To all obscenity my ears I bend, All counsel hate which tends to make me wise, And dearest friends count for mine enemies. If any care I take, ‘tis to be fine, For sure my suit more than my virtues shine. If any time from company I spare, ‘Tis spent in curling, frisling up my hair, Some young Adonais I do strive to be. Sardana Pallas now survives in me. Cards, Dice, and Oaths, concomitant, I love; To Masques, to Plays, to Taverns still I move; And in a word, if what I am you’d hear, Seek out a British, bruitish Cavalier. Such wretch, such monster am I; but yet more I want a heart all this for to deplore. Thus, thus alas! I have mispent my time, My youth, my best, my strength, my bud, and prime, Remembring not the dreadful day of Doom, Nor yet the heavy reckoning for to come, Though dangers do attend me every hour And ghastly death oft threats me with her power: Sometimes by wounds in idle combats taken, Sometimes by Agues all my body shaken; Sometimes by Fevers, all my moisture drinking, My heart lies frying, and my eyes are sinking. Sometimes the Cough, Stitch, painful Pleurisy, With sad affrights of death, do menace me. Sometimes the loathsome Pox my face be-mars With ugly marks of his eternal scars. Sometimes the Frenzy strangely mads my Brain That oft for it in Bedlam I remain. Too many’s my Diseases to recite, That wonder ‘tis I yet behold the light, That yet my bed in darkness is not made, And I in black oblivion’s den long laid. Of Marrow full my bones, of Milk my breasts, Ceas’d by the gripes of Serjeant Death's Arrests: Thus I have said, and what I’ve said you see, Childhood and youth is vain, yea vanity. Middle Age Childhood and youth forgot, sometimes I’ve seen, And now am grown more staid that have been green, What they have done, the same was done by me: As was their praise, or shame, so mine must be. Now age is more, more good ye do expect; But more my age, the more is my defect. But what’s of worth, your eyes shall first behold, And then a world of dross among my gold. When my Wild Oats were sown, and ripe, and mown, I then receiv’d a harvest of mine own. My reason, then bad judge, how little hope Such empty seed should yield a better crop. I then with both hands graspt the world together, Thus out of one extreme into another, But yet laid hold on virtue seemingly: Who climbs without hold, climbs dangerously. Be my condition mean, I then take pains My family to keep, but not for gains. If rich, I’m urged then to gather more To bear me out i’ th’ world and feed the poor; If a father, then for children must provide, But if none, then for kindred near ally’d; If Noble, then mine honour to maintain; If not, yet wealth, Nobility can gain. For time, for place, likewise for each relation, I wanted not my ready allegation. Yet all my powers for self-ends are not spent, For hundreds bless me for my bounty sent, Whose loins I’ve cloth’d, and bellies I have fed, With mine own fleece, and with my household bread. Yea, justice I have done, was I in place, To cheer the good and wicked to deface. The proud I crush’d, th’oppressed I set free, The liars curb’d but nourisht verity. Was I a pastor, I my flock did feed And gently lead the lambs, as they had need. A Captain I, with skill I train’d my band And shew’d them how in face of foes to stand. If a Soldier, with speed I did obey As readily as could my Leader say. Was I a laborer, I wrought all day As cheerfully as ere I took my pay. Thus hath mine age (in all) sometimes done well; Sometimes mine age (in all) been worse than hell. In meanness, greatness, riches, poverty Did toil, did broil; oppress’d, did steal and lie. Was I as poor as poverty could be, Then baseness was companion unto me. Such scum as Hedges and High-ways do yield, As neither sow, nor reap, nor plant, nor build. If to Agriculture I was ordain’d, Great labours, sorrows, crosses I sustain’d. The early Cock did summon, but in vain, My wakeful thoughts up to my painful gain. For restless day and night, I’m robb’d of sleep By cankered care, who sentinel doth keep. My weary breast rest from his toil can find, But if I rest, the more distrest my mind. If happiness my sordidness hath found, ‘Twas in the crop of my manured ground: My fatted Ox, and my exuberous Cow, My fleeced Ewe, and ever farrowing Sow. To greater things I never did aspire, My dunghill thoughts or hopes could reach no higher. If to be rich, or great, it was my fate. How was I broil’d with envy, and with hate? Greater than was the great’st was my desire, And greater still, did set my heart on fire. If honour was the point to which I steer’d, To run my hull upon disgrace I fear’d, But by ambitious sails I was so carried That over flats, and sands, and rocks I hurried, Opprest, and sunk, and sack’d, all in my way That did oppose me to my longed bay. My thirst was higher than Nobility And oft long’d sore to taste on Royalty, Whence poison, Pistols, and dread instruments Have been curst furtherers of mine intents. Nor Brothers, Nephews, Sons, nor Sires I’ve spar’d. When to a Monarchy my way they barr'’d, There set, I rid my self straight out of hand Of such as might my son, or his withstand, Then heapt up gold and riches as the clay, Which others scatter like the dew in May. Sometimes vain-glory is the only bait Whereby my empty school is lur’d and caught. Be I of worth, of learning, or of parts, I judge I should have room in all men’s hearts; And envy gnaws if any do surmount. I hate for to be had in small account. If Bias like, I’m stript unto my skin; I glory in my wealth I have within. Thus good, and bad, and what I am, you see, Now in a word, what my diseases be: The vexing Stone, in bladder and in reins, Torments me with intolerable pains; The windy cholic oft my bowels rend, To break the darksome prison, where it’s penn’d; The knotty Gout doth sadly torture me, And the restraining lame Sciatica; The Quinsy and the Fevers often distaste me, And the Consumption to the bones doth waste me, Subject to all Diseases, that’s the truth, Though some more incident to age, or youth; And to conclude, I may not tedious be, Man at his best estate is vanity. Old Age What you have been, ev’n such have I before, And all you say, say I, and something more. Babe's innocence, Youth’s wildness I have seen, And in perplexed Middle-age have been, Sickness, dangers, and anxieties have past, And on this Stage am come to act my last. I have been young, and strong, and wise as you But now, Bis pueri senes is too true. In every Age I’ve found much vanity. An end of all perfection now I see. It’s not my valour, honour, nor my gold, My ruin’d house, now falling can uphold; It’s not my Learning, Rhetoric, wit so large, Now hath the power, Death’s Warfare, to discharge. It’s not my goodly house, nor bed of down, That can refresh, or ease, if Conscience frown; Nor from alliance now can I have hope, But what I have done well, that is my prop. He that in youth is godly, wise, and sage Provides a staff for to support his age. Great mutations, some joyful, and some sad, In this short Pilgrimage I oft have had. Sometimes the Heavens with plenty smil’d on me, Sometimes, again, rain’d all adversity; Sometimes in honour, sometimes in disgrace, Sometime an abject, then again in place: Such private changes oft mine eyes have seen. In various times of state I’ve also been. I’ve seen a Kingdom flourish like a tree When it was rul’d by that Celestial she, And like a Cedar others so surmount That but for shrubs they did themselves account. Then saw I France, and Holland sav’d, Calais won, And Philip and Albertus half undone. I saw all peace at home, terror to foes, But ah, I saw at last those eyes to close, And then, me thought, the world at noon grew dark When it had lost that radiant Sun-like spark. In midst of griefs, I saw some hopes revive (For ‘twas our hopes then kept our hearts alive); I saw hopes dash’t, our forwardness was shent, And silenc’d we, by Act of Parliament. I’ve seen from Rome, an execrable thing, A plot to blow up Nobles and their King. I’ve seen designs at Ree and Cades cross’t, And poor Palatinate for every lost. I’ve seen a Prince to live on others’ lands, A Royal one, by alms from Subjects’ hands. I’ve seen base men, advanc’d to great degree, And worthy ones, put to extremity, But not their Prince’s love, nor state so high, Could once reverse, their shameful destiny. I’ve seen one stabb’d, another lose his head, And others fly their Country through their dread. I’ve seen, and so have ye, for ‘tis but late, The desolation of a goodly State. Plotted and acted so that none can tell Who gave the counsell, but the Prince of hell. I’ve seen a land unmoulded with great pain, But yet may live to see’t made up again. I’ve seen it shaken, rent, and soak’d in blood, But out of troubles ye may see much good. These are no old wives’ tales, but this is truth. We old men love to tell, what’s done in youth. But I return from whence I stept awry; My memory is short and brain is dry. My Almond-tree (gray hairs) doth flourish now, And back, once straight, begins apace to bow. My grinders now are few, my sight doth fail, My skin is wrinkled, and my cheeks are pale. No more rejoice, at music’s pleasant noise, But do awake at the cock’s clanging voice. I cannot scent savours of pleasant meat, Nor sapors find in what I drink or eat. My hands and arms, once strong, have lost their might. I cannot labour, nor I cannot fight: My comely legs, as nimble as the Roe, Now stiff and numb, can hardly creep or go. My heart sometimes as fierce, as Lion bold, Now trembling, and fearful, sad, and cold. My golden Bowl and silver Cord, e’re long, Shall both be broke, by wracking death so strong. I then shall go whence I shall come no more. Sons, Nephews, leave, my death for to deplore. In pleasures, and in labours, I have found That earth can give no consolation sound To great, to rich, to poor, to young, or old, To mean, to noble, fearful, or to bold. From King to beggar, all degrees shall find But vanity, vexation of the mind. Yea, knowing much, the pleasant’st life of all Hath yet amongst that sweet, some bitter gall. Though reading others’ Works doth much refresh, Yet studying much brings weariness to th’ flesh. My studies, labours, readings all are done, And my last period can e’en elmost run. Corruption, my Father, I do call, Mother, and sisters both; the worms that crawl In my dark house, such kindred I have store. There I shall rest till heavens shall be no more; And when this flesh shall rot and be consum’d, This body, by this soul, shall be assum’d; And I shall see with these same very eyes My strong Redeemer coming in the skies. Triumph I shall, o’re Sin, o’re Death, o’re Hell, And in that hope, I bid you all farewell. 
~~~
They have left behind the established cave with its well-worn floor. Scholarship impels them in hundreds, but generally one by one, to find an unknown passage or scrape out their own. Proto-Semitic linguistic theory, Hittite stratigraphic anomalies, microclimatic economics. "What do you see?" invisible followers ask in their ears, and they whisper "Wonderful things" as they quarry a grain of rock at a time, or examine a fleck of ore, or measure the acidity of a trickle of water. See! Behold! Look! Lo! they cry in season, rapt, in love, chipping away with their pocketknives, pencils, rulers, fingernails, but some have tunneled so narrowly and deep that those behind see nothing but slivers of light around an excavator's haunches. A battered piece of a tablet is all that remains of the so-called Singer of Nab. Circa 1200 BCE, he impressed, or had impressed, some words in clay. He may have composed a religious hymn, praise to the king, a poem of love, an inventory of cattle. (He may have been she, but this is unlikely.) The lines we have could be the beginning or the middle; there may have been ten more, or hundreds. The word before this gap, in fact, means "hundreds." Hundreds led in battle, hundreds slain? A thousand times beloved, nine hundred sheep? And the standard translation of this word, here, is either "desire" or "need." But did he write of a boundless yearning, or mercantile requirements? Was he a "singer"? The scholars who care disagree. Look at them, crouched in a long tunnel dug by means of argument over an antique syntax, warming their hands at a chunk of brick baked maybe in the time of the Trojan War, broken some moment between then and now— peering at it with penlights, squandering eyesight. They know they may crawl out hungry, mumbling, aged and gray, clutching a secret message of small import or nothing, nothing. They seem lost. They seem happy.
~~~
In 1965 my parents broke two laws of Mississippi;
they went to Ohio to marry, returned to Mississippi.
 
They crossed the river into Cincinnati, a city whose name
begins with a sound like sin, the sound of wrong—mis in Mississippi.
 
A year later they moved to Canada, followed a route the same
as slaves, the train slicing the white glaze of winter, leaving Mississippi.
 
Faulkner’s Joe Christmas was born in winter, like Jesus, given his name
for the day he was left at the orphanage, his race unknown in Mississippi.
 
My father was reading War and Peace when he gave me my name.
I was born near Easter, 1966, in Mississippi.
 
When I turned 33 my father said, It’s your Jesus year—you’re the sameage he was when he died. It was spring, the hills green in Mississippi.
 
I know more than Joe Christmas did. Natasha is a Russian name—
though I’m not; it means Christmas child, even in Mississippi.
~~~
The aftermath always happening like an airplane falling, or a man
midair falling from a horse, and an arrow, a gun, many guns
pointing away, at us, our all bull’s-eye-on-the-mark. This is what he
sees when he sees. Maybe Wrong or not, the appropriation, the film
clip, chase, pressed lips over lips, photo moment on the minute-drawn
breath in, the over, the under, bodies in black and white cut to pose,
the way a kiss can pose, dispose of everything around it for another,
dispose of thinking. It’s like waving good-bye. Mouth to mouth seeing
as saying. Inside. Resuscitation back to the brain saying yes as the mouth
makes an O. Circles for the digital age, colored dots for faces already
made for erasing. Hurry, come, he, 6’7”, sees fifteen minutes from the
Mexican border, cremates his old paintings up close. But the ashes were
kept in a book urn, not so afloat in the ocean with my parents, Above,
On, and Under (with Mermaid)
~~~
The shell of objects inwardly consumedWill stand, till some convulsive wind awakes;Such sense hath Fire to waste the heart of things,Nature, such love to hold the form she makes.Thus, wasted joys will show their early bloom,Yet crumble at the breath of a caress;The golden fruitage hides the scathèd bough,Snatch it, thou scatterest wide its emptiness.For pleasure bidden, I went forth last nightTo where, thick hung, the festal torches gleamed;Here were the flowers, the music, as of old,Almost the very olden time it seemed.For one with cheek unfaded, (though he bringsMy buried brothers to me, in his look,)Said, Will you dance?' At the accustomed wordsI gave my hand, the old position took.Sound, gladsome measure! at whose bidding onceI felt the flush of pleasure to my brow,While my soul shook the burthen of the flesh,And in its young pride said, Lie lightly thou!'Then, like a gallant swimmer, flinging highMy breast against the golden waves of sound,I rode the madd'ning tumult of the dance,Mocking fatigue, that never could be found.Chide not,—it was not vanity, nor sense,(The brutish scorn such vaporous delight,)But Nature, cadencing her joy of strengthTo the harmonious limits of her right.She gave her impulse to the dancing Hours,To winds that sweep, to stars that noiseless turn;She marked the measure rapid hearts must keepDevised each pace that glancing feet should learn.And sure, that prodigal o'erflow of life,Unvow'd as yet to family or state,Sweet sounds, white garments, flowery coronalsMake holy, in the pageant of our fate.Sound, measure! but to stir my heart no more—For, as I moved to join the dizzy race,My youth fell from me; all its blooms were gone,And others showed them, smiling, in my face.Faintly I met the shock of circling formsLinked each to other, Fashion's galley-slaves,Dream-wondering, like an unaccustomed ghostThat starts, surprised, to stumble over graves.For graves were 'neath my feet, whose placid masksSmiled out upon my folly mournfully,While all the host of the departed said,Tread lightly—thou art ashes, even as we.'
~~~
You can get there from here, though
there’s no going home.
 
Everywhere you go will be somewhere
you’ve never been. Try this:
 
head south on Mississippi 49, one-
by-one mile markers ticking off
 
another minute of your life. Follow this
to its natural conclusion—dead end
 
at the coast, the pier at Gulfport where
riggings of shrimp boats are loose stitches
 
in a sky threatening rain. Cross over
the man-made beach, 26 miles of sand
 
dumped on the mangrove swamp—buried
terrain of the past. Bring only
 
what you must carry—tome of memory,
its random blank pages. On the dock
 
where you board the boat for Ship Island,
someone will take your picture:
 
the photograph—who you were—
will be waiting when you return.
~~~
I.
When his dogs leapt on Actaeon, he   
cried (did he cry out?)—He flung
his arm to command, they tore his hand   
from the wrist stump, tore
guts from his belly through the tunic, ripped   
the cry from his throat.
That’s how we know a god, when the facts   
leap at the tenderest innards, and we know
the god is what we can’t change. You
stood over me as I woke, I opened my eyes, I saw
that I’d seen and that it was too   
late: the seeing
of you in the doorway with weak electric light
fanning behind you in the hall, and my room and narrow pallet steeped in shadow
were what I couldn’t change, and distantly   
I wanted you, and, as distantly,
I heard the dogs, baying.
    II.
And yet the fountain spends itself, and it is   
in the clear
light of its losing that we seem   
to take delight:
you dipped your hand in its running braid   
to sprinkle my forehead, my lips.
Garden deities observed us: three nymphs
with moss staining their haunches, a pug-nosed faun.
The wound in water closed
perfectly around your gesture, erasing it,
so that only the glimmer, swiftly   
drying, on my face recalled
our interruption
of the faultless, cold, passionate, perpetual
idea of the stream’s descent—
which, unlike ours, would always be renewed.
    III.
I kissed a flame, what did I expect.
Those days, you painted in fire. Tangerine, gold:   
one would have had to be a pilgrim to walk   
through that wall of molten glass.
And purification
could be conceived, if not   
attained, only after many years,
in autumn, in a fire greater than yours,
though menstrual blood still tinged the threshold
and our ex-votos were sordid—scraps of blistered flesh
taped to kitsch prayer cards—and neither of us knew   
the object of this exercise, except   
having, inadvertently, each of us, burned
we recognized the smell
of wood smoke, the slow swirl
flakes of wood ash make in heavy air;
and we were ready, each in a private way, to make   
the gifts the season required.   
Mine was the scene
of my young self in your arms,
eyes in your eyes, clutched in the effort
to give each other away—when I glimpsed
behind your pleasure, fear; behind   
fear, anger; and knew   
in a bolt some gifts
conceal a greater gift.
I have kept it. Now I am ready to give it back   
into darker flame
in this season of goldenrod, the ardent weed,   
and Queen Anne’s lace in its mantilla of ash.   
And yet, how lumpishly, how stupidly I stand.
How much that is human will never burn.
    IV.
And if you should answer?
I listened, years before I knew you, to the whine
of wind through the high stony pastures above my childhood village;
I breathed lavender and thyme and burned my bare legs   
on nettles, scraped them on thistles, and rubbed   
the sore skin till it reddened all the more. When we
walked the uplands together, you burned your hand
and I kissed the crimsoning nettle-rash. “We are the Lords of need,”
you said Hafiz said,
and I believed you, and we were.
In the rugs of your country, carmine is crushed   
from insects, cochineal; saffron gold
is boiled from crocus stamens; and indigo
of heaven and fountain pools is soaked, hours upon hours,   
from indigo leaves. “Like the angel Harut,”
you said, “We are in the calamity of love-desire.”
The angel is chained by neck and knees, head down, in the pit of Babel
for falling in love. Your carpets
told a different story: scarlet and saffron   
blush as in Paradise, and God reveals himself
in wine, flame, tulips, and the light in a mortal eye.
All night you held me, sleepless, on my childhood cot in the stone house;
all night the wind seethed through crags and twisted olive trees,   
high on the scents of thyme and goat droppings. “All night,”
Hafiz sang, “I hope the breeze of dawn will cherish the lovers.”   
But the breeze of dawn is the angel of death.   
You are in your far landscape now, I am in mine:
the wind complains and I can’t understand the words.   
And if you should answer?   
You, ten years away, in a different wind.
“We are in the calamity,” Hafiz sang. “But tell the tale   
of the minstrel and of wine, and leave time alone. Time   
is a mystery no skill will solve.” We should
thread words like pearls, you said, and the grateful sky   
would scatter the Pleiades upon us   
though we couldn’t see, and that was long ago.
    V.
The carpet is not a story. It is a place,   
garden of crisscrossed pathways, labyrinth,   
fountain, pool, and stream.
As though the fabric had ripped at the vanishing point   
at the top of the street
of ashen façades and slate-sloped roofs, you stepped
through the gap, out of your own world.   
I had already lost my world.   
We met in a torn design
which we tore further, pulling the tall warp,
thread wrapped tightly around our fingers until it bit the flesh   
and the rue de Lille unravelled.
I know about design: it’s my job,
arranging other people’s letters in star charts
that phosphoresce in the dark between the closed covers of books.
You knew about design from the holes   
blown through your country.
We spoke in a language of no country on earth.
You moved slowly, in shadow, teaching the shadows   
to echo my name. You ripped my shirt at the neck.   
Was it The Beloved I held, holding you?
Down the middle of the carpet the river
weaves a thousand gray glimmers into the deeper green.   
The river knows about mourning; that’s its job.
How many years has it practiced? With such fleet fingers. A man   
woke me at dawn this morning, sobbing and cursing in the street,   
reeling from sidewalk to gutter and back again.
On my long gray street, the rue de Lille, where I still live.
~~~
Like a bowerbird trailing a beakful of weeds   
Like prize ribbons for the very best
The lover, producer   
Of another’s pleasure
He whom her swollen lips await
Might wing through any day of the decade
A form of health insurance   
For which it is never too late
Titanic, silver brush
Hindenburg, of exploding cigars a climax
The watery below, the fiery above
Ashes of print between—pigment between
If the crippled woman were to descend   
From her bed, her fortress beyond midnight
Downstairs (nude/staircase) to the kitchen   
Naked to sit at the table (writing/thinking)
She might hear the washer spin like a full orchestra   
Complete a cycle like a train crash
Before the fiend would stare through the window   
Step smoothly into the kitchen, stop some clocks.
Envy shapes a fig tree in one’s breast,   
That is, bluntly to say, a cancer,
That is to say
In a mind, a fertile windy field. A murdered child.
Well then, fear, primarily of falling.   
Ebony surf toils on the beach, a glaze
At the same moment I am (from a cliff) falling   
The kitchen fiend removes his Dior tie
Places his hand over the woman’s   
And softly says: I am the lover.
Now if the crippled woman began to dance   
To pirouette, to rumba
Growling for her child
Her burning page, the devil would be shamed
(Materialism is not for everyone / Religion is   
The extension of politics by other means
~~~
The toy
become the aesthetic archetype
As if
some patient peasant God
had rubbed and rubbed
the Alpha and Omega
of Form
into a lump of metal
A naked orientation
unwinged unplumed
the ultimate rhythm
has lopped the extremities
of crest and claw
from
the nucleus of flight
The absolute act
of art
conformed
to continent sculpture
—bare as the brow of Osiris—
this breast of revelation
an incandescent curve
licked by chromatic flames
in labyrinths of reflections
This gong
of polished hyperaesthesia
shrills with brass
as the aggressive light
strikes
its significance
The immaculate
conception
of the inaudible bird
occurs
in gorgeous reticence
~~~
No animals were harmed in the making of this joyful noise: A thick, twisted stem from the garden is the wedding couple's ceremonial ram's horn. Its substance will not survive one thousand years, nor will the garden, which is today their temple, nor will their names, nor their union now announced with ritual blasts upon the zucchini shofar. Shall we measure blessings by their duration? Through the narrow organic channel fuzzily come the prescribed sustained notes, short notes, rests. All that rhythm requires. Among their talents, the newlyweds excel at making and serving mustard-green soup and molasses cookies, and taking nieces and nephews for walks in the woods. The gardener dyes eggs with onion skins, wraps presents, tells stories, finds the best seashells; his friends adore his paper-cuttings— "Nothing I do will last," he says. What is this future approval we think we need; who made passing time our judge? Do we want butter that endures for ages, or butter that melts into homemade cornbread now? —the note that rings in my deaf ear without ceasing, or two voices abashed by the vows they undertake? This moment's chord of earthly commotion will never be struck exactly so again— though love does love to repeat its favorite lines. So let the shofar splutter its slow notes and quick notes, let the nieces and nephews practice their flutes and trombones, let living room pianos invite unwashed hands, let glasses of different fullness be tapped for their different notes, let everyone learn how to whistle, let the girl dawdling home from her trumpet lesson pause at the half-built house on the corner, where the newly installed maze of plumbing comes down to one little pipe whose open end she can reach, so she takes a deep breath and makes the whole house sound.
~~~
My first teacher told me
               that what sculpture involved
was being a God. He was not talking
 
about the old ways, about fashioning
               a man out of a rib.
Out of the earth. A god can see something
 
that does not exist yet in the world. Who
               could have imagined the giraffe,
the octopus, the flounder? Who
 
could have imagined our sharp sensibilities,
               our contortions? The materials
are all there—eyes and blood and respiration,
 
but still, they get made new. Now I know
               that these days such a view
is against science, but the idea of a god is as real
 
as god is not. A scientist who sees
               what has been done
versus one who can make straw out of gold.
 
Or more like plastic out of petroleum.
               Paper out of trees. You
have to decide which kind you will be.
 
We’re mistaken when we equate the wise
               and the prophetic. You’re always
looking either backwards or forwards.
 
This piece puts you on a precipice.
               It’s up to you
which way you fall. You see—it’s all there.
 
The scientist and the artist were once one—
               how else could you record
what you saw? How else, find a way of seeing?
 
~~~
Should they may be they might if they delight
In why they must see it be there not only necessarily   
But which they might in which they might   
For which they might delight if they look there   
And they see there that they look there
To see it be there which it is if it is
Which may be where where it is
If they do not occasion it to be different
From what it is.
In one direction there is the sun and the moon
In the other direction there are cumulus clouds and the sky   
In the other direction there is why
They look at what they see
They look very long while they talk along
And they may be said to see that at which they look   
Whenever there is no chance of its not being warmer   
Than if they wish which they were.
They see that they have what is there may there   
Be there also what is to be there if they may care   
They care for it of course they care for it.   
Now only think three times roses green and blue   
And vegetables and pumpkins and pansies too
Which they like as they are very likely not to be   
Reminded that it is more than ever necessary
That they should never be surprised at any one time
At just what they have been given by taking what they have   
Which they are very careful not to add with   
As they may easily indulge in the fragrance   
Not only of which but by which they know   
That they tell them so.
~~~
When I see the two cops laughing 
after one of them gets shot
because this is TV and one says
while putting pressure on the wound,Haha, you're going to be fine,
and the other says, I know, haha!, 
as the ambulance arrives—
I know the men are white.
I think of a clip from the hours 
of amateur footage I've seen
when another man at an intersection
gets shot, falls, and bleeds from a hole
the viewer knows exists only by the way 
the dark red pools by the standing cop's feet,
gun now holstered, who
yells the audience back to the sidewalk.
I know which one is dying 
while black and which one stands by white. 
I think this morning about the student 
in my class who wrote a free write line 
on the video I played
that showed a man pouring water
on his own chest, "...the homoerotic 
scene against a white sky" with no other men 
present. Who gets to see and who followswhat script? I ask my students. 
Whose lines are these and by what hand
are they written?
 
~~~
I
 
I am asking something gone
return: at least one night, her face
 
a girl’s, just twenty, and
to be married in a month,
 
holding the dress’s hem to her lips
as places are called. And I,
 
come along too late to know her
trembling, parting the curtain—
 
let me hear her now
perched on the ladder, recite
 
“But Mama, . . .
am I pretty enough . . . ?”
 
II
 
When Emily marries, ladies in hats
drown out the proper vows
 
—it’s what the play requires;
the everyday over the sacred. Even the set
 
is made of items found in the actors’ garages
so we always see back to the bones.
 
Here my grandmother stands at the altar
with her fictional George
 
and gossip swells in the pews
which are rows of folding chairs.
 
 
III
 
Among the murmuring departed,
in the cemetery,
 
my grandmother takes
her place at the empty plot.
 
She’s the newcomer
who can’t believe she’s dead
 
if the living roam
just on the crest of this hill.
 
My grandmother in white
poplin dress and hair ribbon
 
lifts her arms in despair—
Emily, untouched by the rain.
 
 
IV
 
Tomorrow her face will glow
on the cover of The Shreveport Times— 
a gorgeous girl demanding her life.
“But oh!” she cries in Emily’s voice,
 
“I can go back there
and live all those days over again . . .”
 
 
V
 
So Emily steps back
into childhood
 
though the wiser dead
have told her don’t—
 
into her mother’s kitchen,
her twelfth birthday, a moment
 
she thought she was happy.
She watches now
 
that life: mother speaking
gruffly, father late to work.
 
Dead Emily kisses the cheek
of the classmate playing her mother—
 
understanding, in that kitchen,
they’d all been blind:
 
they never knew those people
they said they loved.
 
 
VI
 
My grandmother maintains
her grace to the end.
 
She is the queen of the theater;
all of Shreveport melts for her smile.
 
She holds her palms out
to feel the heavy drops as the curtains close,
 
though she knows this rain
is only the sound of rain.
~~~
it doesn’t matter when I cross.
two seconds and they’re gone.
the ferry facing Ulus. the trees
that spanked of green. the narrow
bags of temples. beyond that –
just – these Peri scenes
 
            when the human body sweats             the skin produce an oil
 
            when Peri bodies sweat            it does not produce the oil
 
the ropes fall to the pavement
their waters slap me still
their green glow sweats
into the pavement waters
slap me still –
 
            I could curl among the roses
             I would make an aqualung
 
we will reach the edge of this walk soon.
all lights torn out for fuel.
 
            move my fingers in the dark
 
awoke without a start.
Peri here – my name is Peri –
 
my name is Perihan
~~~
I step into my mother’s room, she says, and though a woman’s body is a calendar of births and injunctions to death, time disappears. Only dead enough to bury could prove sound to silence or the anxiety I know by heart and lung. In my mother’s room. The tie between us anticipates any move to sever it. Terror and lack of perspective. The river runs clear without imparting its clarity, whether we step into it or not.
Deep in the bones, he says. If a butterfly fluttering its wings in China can cause a storm in Rhode Island, how much more the residues of radiation, family resemblance and past rituals. The stove glows red. Thin apple trees line the road. You think you are taking a clean sheet of paper, and it’s already covered with signs, illegible, as by child’s hand.
 
The heart has its rhythm of exchange, she says, without surplus or deficit. Mine murmurs your name while conjugating precise explosions with valves onto the infinite. I take it down with me, in the body, to develop in a darkroom of my own. They way the current elongates our reflection in the river and seems to carry it off.
A death without corruption is the promise of photography, he says. Focus and light meter translating a cut of flesh into a tense past laughing its red off. But the film’s too clear. Even if smudged with fingerprints. Even if the light falls into the arms of love.
~~~
We knew.
    Anne to come.   
    Anne to come.   
    Be new.
    Be new too.
    Anne to come   
    Anne to come   
    Be new
    Be new too.
    And anew.
    Anne to come.   
    Anne anew.
    Anne do come.
    Anne do come too, to come and to come not to come and as to
and new, and new too.   
    Anne do come.   
    Anne knew.
    Anne to come.   
    Anne anew.
    Anne to come.   
    And as new.
    Anne to come to come too.
    Half of it.
    Was she
    Windows
    Was she
    Or mine
    Was she
    Or as she
    For she or she or sure.   
    Enable her to say.   
    And enable her to say.
    Or half way.
    Sitting down.
    Half sitting down.
    And another way.
    Their ships
    And please.
    As the other side.
    And another side
    Incoming   
    Favorable and be fought.
    Adds to it.
    In half.
    Take the place of take the place of take the place of taking   
place.
    Take the place of in places.
    Take the place of taken in place of places.
    Take the place of it, she takes it in the place of it. In the way   
of arches architecture.
    Who has seen shown
    You do.
    Hoodoo.
    If can in countenance to countenance a countenance as in as   
seen.
    Change it.
    Not nearly so much.
    He had.   
    She had.   
    Had she.
    He had nearly very nearly as much.
    She had very nearly as much as had had.
    Had she.   
    She had.
    Loose loosen, Loose losten to losten, to lose.
    Many.
    If a little if as little if as little as that.
    If as little as that, if it is as little as that that is if it is very nearly all of it, her dear her dear does not mention a ball at all.
    Actually.
    As to this.
    Actually as to this.
    High or do you do it.
    Actually as to this high or do you do it.   
    Not how do you do it.
    Actually as to this.
    Not having been or not having been nor having been or not
having been.   
    Interrupted.
    All of this makes it unanxiously.
    Feel so.
    Add to it.
    As add to it.   
    He.
    He.
    As add to it.   
    As add to it.   
    As he
    As he as add to it.
    He.
    As he
    Add to it.   
    Not so far.   
    Constantly as seen.
    Not as far as to mean.
    I mean I mean.
    Constantly.   
    As far.
    So far.
    Forbore.
    He forbore.   
    To forbear.
    Their forbears.
    Plainly.
    In so far.   
    Instance.
    For instance.
    In so far.
~~~
Love
Is an interruption or an aberration, a force in opposition to the ultimate inertia
of the universe, 
Wrote Marguerite Duras. 
Whether or not it is worth it it occurs. Whether or not it is to be believed it is. 
The wind moves us without a frond being needed to be held by a slave girl. 
The rudiments of sentences are ancient without a mouth needing to remember
what it is losing as it lets those words out, something eviller than what they
even mean right now, something too evil to be known right now 
Or ever. 
I feel sure that even the most culpable people have other qualities secreted
away 
Adjusting their garments in light of fate 
He turned his head upward, he looked up the white wall. The light from the
lamp could be light coming from a great distance, it could be a great distance
away, and the wall could be snow it is so beautiful, he said. His head looking
up the wall, his eyes looking up it, he said, that nail in the wall could also be
beautiful, for so far away.
~~~
Miss Scarlett, effen we kain git de doctahw’en Miss Melly’s time come, doan you bodderAh kin manage. Ah knows all ’bout birthin.Ain’ mah ma a midwife? Ain’ she raise meter be a midwife, too? Jes’ you leave itter me. She warn’t dar. Well’m, Dey Cookie say Miss Meade done got wud early dis mawnin’dat young Mist’ Phil done been shot an’ Miss Meadeshe tuck de cah’ige an’ Ole Talbot an’Besty an’ dey done gone ter fotch him home.Cookie say he bad hurt an’ Miss Meade ain’gwin ter be studyin’ ’bout comin’ uphyah. Dey ain’ dar, Miss Scarlett. Ah drapped inter pass time of de day wid Mammy onmah way home.Dey’s doen gone. House all locked up.Spec dey’s at de horsepittle.Miss Elsing ober at de horsepittle.Dey Cookie ’lows a whole lot of woundedsojers come in on de early train. Cookie fixin’soup ter tek over dar. She say—Yas’mGawdlmighty, Miss Scarlett! De Yankees ain’ at Tara, s dey? Gawdlmighty, Miss Scarlett! Whut’ll dey do ter Maw?Dey’s fightin’ at Jonesboro, Miss Scarlett!Dey say our gempumus is gittin’ beat.Oh, Gawd, Miss Scarlett! Whut’ll happen terMaw an’ Poke? Oh, Gawd, Miss Scarlett! Whut’ll happenter us effen de Yankees gits hyah? Oh, Gawd—Ah ain’ nebber seed him, Miss Scarlett.No’m, he ain’ at de horsepittle.Miss Merriwetheran’ Miss Elsing ain’ dar needer.A man he tole me de doctah down     by de car shed     wid the woundedsojers jes’ come in frum Jonesboro, butMiss Scarlett, Ah wuz sceered ter go down dar terde shed—dey’s folkses dyin’ down dar. Ah’ssceered of daid folkses—Miss Scarlett, fo’ Gawd, Ahcouldn’ sceercely git one of dem ter readyo’ note. Dey wukin’ in de horsepittlelak dey all done gone crazy. One doctahhe say ter me, “Damn yo’ hide! Doan you comeroun’ hyah bodderi’ me ’bout babies w’enwe got a mess of men dyin’ hyah. Git some woman ter he’p you.” An’ den Ah went aroun’ an’ about an’ ask fer newslak you done tole me an’ dey all say “fightin’at Jonesboro” an’ Ah—Is her time nigh, Miss Scarlett?Is de doctah come?Gawd, Miss Scarlett! Miss Melly bad off!Fo’ Gawd, Miss Scarlett—Fo’ Gawd, Miss Scarlett!We’s got ter have a doctah. Ah—Ah—Miss Scarlett, Ah doan know nutin’ ‘bout bringin’ babies.
~~~
Beards of   water
                      some of them have.
         Others are blowing whistles of   water.
         Faces astonished that constant   water
                  jumps from their mouths.
                   Jaws of lions are snarling   water
through green teeth over chins of moss.
                              Dolphins toss jets of   water
                                    from open snouts
                              to an upper theater of   water.
                     Children are riding swans and   water   
       coils from the S-shaped necks and spills
                        in flat foils from pincered bills.
                            A solemn curly-headed bull
                            puts out a swollen tongue of   water.   
                                 Cupids naked are making   water   
                               into a font that never is full.
                   A goddess is driving a chariot through   water.
                         Her reins and whips are tight white   water.
                         Bronze hoofs of horses wrangle with   water.
                              Marble faces half hidden in leaves.
                         Faces whose hair is leaves and grapes
                         of stone are peering from living leaves.
                                       Faces with mossy lips unlocked
                                                               always uttering   water,
                                                                                          water
                                                wearing their features blank   
                                             their ears deaf, their eyes mad
                                          or patient or blind or astonished at   water
                                           always uttered out of their mouths.
~~~
﻿﻿Help me come up with a strategy to get through this white noise. 
— U.S. Representative Cynthia McKinney,
  November 2001



Are we on the ground now? Ally cells and I said operations.
We cleared 50% of a wonderful friend and enduring opposition.
Take the solid.
Louder.
We clearly are loud. We are the postal system.
No evidence has been information.
Attacking the caves. Are you on the ground enduring?
A wonderful friend ramped it up.
You ought to open your mail.
Opposition element: the air. The talents work with precision.
84%. The population attacking the caves, the talents work with the
caves and tunnels.
Hiding in caves, wavering in caves and hiding in mosques.
A wonderful friend on the ground.
Freedom I said: the enduring ally cells.
Interested in the view, in our aid sensitivities.
50% to the front of our effort adding that 80% are willing to play.
Independent oper-oppo-sition forces that are rosy.
So make assumptions on the ground. Are we on the ground now?
Can be more than air. The target. The air liaison.
Campaign with the bombing and entirely happy.
Attacking the leaflets.
We keep working hiding in hiding in caves
and cowering in cowering in cowering in caves
and I could say confidential areas.
The mosques and rest efforts are mad.
Execution in the targeting of democracy.
Those risks culti-targeting to minimize the individual.
An obligation to the spirit of enterprise.
A war of roundup freezing worldwide, and proceeding on course.
Training facilities, proceeding on course, freezing their guided
munitions.
A population is tons of struggle against evil.
A civilized world of innocents in the mud, an enemy that’s on the
ground for there is no neutral ever. No neutral homeland.
For the first time first time first time in history
ordinary busi-security bioterror
to defend enemies with the no-ness of life.
Confident in destruction / complete and cause / certain of the rightness
of this time / in the right / man the victories / to comment for a freer
world history / committee of evil / defeat the forces / we will fight and
great coalition wherever they are an era of over flight right against
terror basing global terror the global trade and lives of our world improve /
the modern alliance / I like citizens / but rather than the dust settle it
could mean / as acknowledged / the carpet bombs precision bombs / as
long as 23 months and I said go to America on alert / get a softball to
school if you work / take your child / game this afternoon / game or a
soccer to the president’s going to go to the game / the fight/ our new
baseball game / to help us in our task / force will sign terrorists tracking
American citizens / to protect level warriors / the decibel from these
shadows / open your mail louder
~~~
The threewomen who all walked
In the same dress
And it had falling ferns on it
Skipped parallel
To the progress
Of Giovanni Franchi
Giovanni Franchi’s wrists flicked
Flickeringly as he flacked them
His wrists explained things
Infectiously by way of his adolescence
His adolescence was all there was of him
Whatever was left was rather awkward
His adolescence tuned to the tops of trees
Descended to the fallacious nobility
Of his first pair of trousers
They were tubular      flapped friezily
The color of coppered mustard
What matter
Were they not the first
No others could ever be the first again
The ferns on the flounces of the threewomen
Began fading as she thought of it
Tea table problems for insane asylyms
Are démodé
Démodé
Allow us to rely on our instincts
The threewomen was composed of three instincts
Each sniffing divergently directed draughts
The first instinct    first again    (may
Renascent gods save us from the enigmatic
Penetralia of Firstness)
Was to be faithful to a man       first
The second       to be loyal to herself first
She would have to find which self first
The third which might as well have been first
Was to find out how many toes the
Philosopher Giovanni Bapini had       first
Giovanni Franchi hooligan-faced and latin-born
You imagine what he looked like
Looked as nearly as he could as the
Philosopher looked
His articulations were excellent
Still    where Giovanni Bapini was cymophanous
Giovanni Franchi was merely pale
He scuttled winsomely
To its distribution from a puffer
For the declaration of War
His acolytian sincerity
The sensitive down among his freckles
Fell in with the patriotic souls of flags
Red white and green flags      fillipping piazzas
When the “National Idea” arrived on the Milan Express
Continually cutting off an angle from Paschkowski’s
Through plate-glass swingings
To look as busy bodily
As the philosopher’s brain was
As Giovanni Bapini importuned mobs
From monumental gums
To the sparky detritus
From the hurried cigarette
Of his disciple
Whose papa and mama kept a trattoria
Audaciously squatting right opposite the Pitti Palace
The Pitti Palace however stolid      could hardly help noticing
Being an aristocrat it went on looking
As plainly piled up as ever
The Pitti Palace has never been known to mention the trattoria
Or mention Giovanni Franchi
Sitting in it
At a book
It could not see from that distance
Giovanni watching the munchers supporting his parents
With an eye
On assuring himself
Of their sufficient impression
By erudition
He was so young
That explains so much
No book ever explained what to be young is
But they look so much more important for that
Giovanni was in continuous ecstacy
Induced by the imposing look of them
When Giovanni Bapini spoke of them
He could not tell
How completely more precious
Would be such knowledge
As how many toes the philosopher Giovanni Bapini had
Now the threewomen
For pity’s sake
Let us think of her as she    to save time
Seeing the minor Giovanni
Sitting at the major Giovanni’s feet
Made sure he must be counting his toes
All to the contrary    he was picking the philosopher’s brains
Happy in the security that when he had done
He would still be youthful enough to sort out his own
He listened at the elder’s lips
That taught him of earthquakes and
Of women—
His manners were abominable
He would kill a woman
Quite inconspicuously it is true
And neglect to attend her funeral
I mean the older man
And what he told
Giovanni Franchi
About these pernicious persons
Was so extremely good for him
It entirely spoilt his first love-affair
To such an extent          it never came off
We have read of
Trattoria    meaning eating house.
Piazzas    or squares
The Pitti Palace    enormous
And Paschkowski’s      for beer
All are in Firenze
Firenze is Florence
Some think it is a woman with flowers in her hair
But NO       it is a city with stones on the streets
Giovanni Bapini often said
Everybody in Firenze knows me
And everybody did
Excepting—That is      she didn’t
She never knew what he was
Or how he was himself
Yet she uniquely was the one
To speculate      upon the number of his toes
The days growing longer
Fulfilling her of curiousity
She made a moth’s net
Of metaphor and miracles
And on the incandescent breath of civilizations
She chased by moon-and-morn light
Philosopher’s toes
As virginal      as had he never worn them
Clear of ‘white marks means money’
All quicks and cores
They fluttered to her fantasy
Fell into her lap
While she gathered her ferny flounces about them
They inappropriately passed
But Giovanni Franchi was there
He almost winked it at her
That he was there
His eyes were intrepid with phantom secrets
The Philosopher had flung to him
And as she tripped by him
She guessed      these all
All    but the number of those toes
She made diurnal pilgrimage
To the trattoria
To eat
Trout    that might have been trained for circuses
If minarets    grew in miniature whirlpools
And mayonnaise       that helped her to forget
That what is underneath       need never matter
She put all minor riddles out of her
Such as
What was the under-cover of Franchi’s book
Telling to the plaid pattern of the tablecloth
Too shy to interrogate
She sent ambassadors
To the disciple
They returned
Oh rats
Quite manifest    that Giovanni Franchi
Some semieffigy
Damned by scholiums
Knew no more      how many toes—
Than      Giovanni Bapini knew himself
 
~~~
She was thinner, with a mannered gauntness   
as she paused just inside the double
glass doors to survey the room, silvery cape   
billowing dramatically behind her. What’s this,
I thought, lifting a hand until
she nodded and started across the parquet;   
that’s when I saw she was dressed all in gray,   
from a kittenish cashmere skirt and cowl
down to the graphite signature of her shoes.   
“Sorry I’m late,” she panted, though   
she wasn’t, sliding into the chair, her cape
tossed off in a shudder of brushed steel.   
We kissed. Then I leaned back to peruse
my blighted child, this wary aristocratic mole.
“How’s business?” I asked, and hazarded   
a motherly smile to keep from crying out:   
Are you content to conduct your life   
as a cliché and, what’s worse,
an anachronism, the brooding artist’s demimonde?   
Near the rue Princesse they had opened
a gallery cum souvenir shop which featured
fuzzy off-color Monets next to his acrylics, no doubt,
plus bearded African drums and the occasional miniature   
gargoyle from Notre Dame the Great Artist had   
carved at breakfast with a pocket knife.
“Tourists love us. The Parisians, of course”—
she blushed—“are amused, though not without   
a certain admiration ...”
                                     The Chateaubriand
arrived on a bone-white plate, smug and absolute   
in its fragrant crust, a black plug steaming
like the heart plucked from the chest of a worthy enemy;   
one touch with her fork sent pink juices streaming.
“Admiration for what?” Wine, a bloody
Pinot Noir, brought color to her cheeks. “Why,   
the aplomb with which we’ve managed
to support our Art”—meaning he’d convinced
her to pose nude for his appalling canvases,   
faintly futuristic landscapes strewn   
with carwrecks and bodies being chewed
by rabid cocker spaniels. “I’d like to come by
the studio,” I ventured, “and see the new stuff.”   
“Yes, if you wish ...” A delicate rebuff
before the warning: “He dresses all
in black now. Me, he drapes in blues and carmine—
and even though I think it’s kinda cute,
in company I tend toward more muted shades.”
She paused and had the grace
to drop her eyes. She did look ravishing,   
spookily insubstantial, a lipstick ghost on tissue,   
or as if one stood on a fifth-floor terrace
peering through a fringe of rain at Paris’   
dreaming chimney pots, each sooty issue   
wobbling skyward in an ecstatic oracular spiral.
“And he never thinks of food. I wish
I didn’t have to plead with him to eat ....” Fruit   
and cheese appeared, arrayed on leaf-green dishes.
I stuck with café crème. “This Camembert’s
so ripe,” she joked, “it’s practically grown hair,”   
mucking a golden glob complete with parsley sprig   
onto a heel of bread. Nothing seemed to fill
her up: She swallowed, sliced into a pear,
speared each tear-shaped lavaliere
and popped the dripping mess into her pretty mouth.   
Nowhere the bright tufted fields, weighted
vines and sun poured down out of the south.   
“But are you happy?” Fearing, I whispered it   
quickly. “What? You know, Mother”—
she bit into the starry rose of a fig—
“one really should try the fruit here.”I’ve lost her, I thought, and called for the bill.
~~~
                                      A collaboration with Emma Lazarus



Give me your tired, your poor,
Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free,
The wretched refuse of your teeming shore.
Send these, the homeless, tempest-tost to me,
I lift my lamp beside the golden door!
Give me your gentrificatees of the Lower East Side including all the well-heeled young Europeans who’ll take apartments without leases
Give me your landlords, give me your cooperators
Give me the guys who sell the food and the computers to the public schools in District One
Give me the IRS-FBI-CIA men who don’t take election day off
Give me the certain members of the school board & give me the district superintendent
Give me all the greedy members of both american & foreign capitalist religious sects
Give me the parents of the punk people
Give me the guy who puts those stickers in the Rice Krispies
Give me the doctor who thinks his time is more valuable than mine and my daughter’s & the time of all the other non-doctors in this world
Give me the mayor, his mansion, and the president & his white house
Give me the cops who laugh and sneer at meetings where they demonstrate the new uses of mace and robots instead of the old murder against people who are being evicted
Give me the landlord’s sleazy lawyers and the deal-making judges in housing court & give me the landlord’s arsonist
Give me the known & unknown big important rich guys who now bank on our quaint neighborhood
Give me, forgive me, the writers who have already or want to write bestsellers in this country
Together we will go to restore Ellis Island, ravaged for years by wind, weather and vandals
I was surprised and saddened when I heard that the Statue of Liberty was in such a serious state of disrepair & I want to help
This is the most generous contribution I can afford.
~~~
I want to make beautiful things, even if nobody cares.



To make, you first have            to create materials. Re: man, we knowthe rib removed. But, before — ?             Forget ash to ash, dust                        &c.                        Stick a floating rib (i.e. thoracic11–12, y’know — “Edenic”) in a glass             of  water with the promise                        it’ll grow            roots like leek or fur                        like chia. The joke’s Crusoe             astride the bone or   Jim & Huck paddlingrustic as a ballpoint pen will go.             — Nn-o.                       (That’s not a plank 
~~~
Once when I was harmless
and didn’t know any better,
a mirror to the front of me
and an ocean behind,
I lay wedged in the middle of daylight,
paper-doll thin, dreaming,
then I vanished. I gave the day a fingerprint,
then forgot.
I sat naked on a towel
on a hot June Monday.
The sun etched the inside of my eyelids,
while a boy dozed at my side.
The smell of all oceans was around us—
steamy salt, shell, and sweat,
but I reached for the distant one.
A tide rose while I slept,
and soon I was alone. Try being
a figure in memory. It’s hollow there.
For truth’s sake, I’ll say she was on a beach
and her eyes were closed.
She was bare in the sand, long,
and the hour took her bit by bit.
~~~
The Swiss just do whateverlike masturbating their doink-doinksdeep in rural Francein the shadow of Mont Blanc.Heavy, dependableand prepared for whateverthe Swiss vago-simulacrum recognizesas larderKing Hussein and President Fabio,always just about to touch each otheron their devolved sparkle-offsand Neil Patrick Harris appreciation pages.Everyone knows when these bizzarre Swiss comeththey cometh with fluffy Beatles-likesix packs of shit-covered reindeerknock-knocking like a bummer.Glitter is the Swiss Army knifeof the most bedazzlingly ridiculousemotions: the part just beforethe paranoid cheese-maker says,“Whatever you do in Palm Springs,don’t yodel”—a most unusual Swiss Missmixture of very early skunk and the roboticsadness of women’s moldheavy, greasy, dense and low, likelethargic sea-green gardenswith a buzz overpowering, likemodern outdoor inbreeding.
~~~
I am watching the movie Twelve Angry Men
because there is a character in it
who reminds me of him.
He is the one who wants to go to the baseball game
instead of decide on a man’s life,
he is the weak one, the one afraid to reveal
what he really feels, the one for whom everything
is a joke. He is not Henry Fonda,
the tight-lipped moral one.
The man is despicable, his weaknesses obvious
to all, as obvious as Henry Fonda’s goodness.
I watch the movie again and again, loving
the black and white of it, soothed
by the sound of my father’s voice,
the careless pronunciation, the easy
shrugging of the shoulders at every crucial question.
I sink lower into the dark arms of the sofa.
Strange how comfortable the familiar is,
how we can even prefer it,
however terrifying.
~~~
For Adrienne Rich
[Our burden to carry as she did
shift the weight of song, heft and gnosis
“body poetics”
as a total event
her fullness rare in the amnesiac Kulchur
awake, awareness & urgency when poetry serves]



name appearseverywhere and in dreambody armor removedwhat now, legacy, archivumwe female archons preserve ofintensity a durance a hand you recognize(sounds sound)assurance as lives ondrank of thatdrank of thisalmost suffocated, then drowneddowned but neverwhat only she could only knowas herself living in the brute timespeak of a syntax of rendition?the politics of Empire chip awayas poetry attests, give it upcurve of a water-starved globeto follow and be following?racism, sexism, struggleeverything in intense grasp ofconsciousness — cut in crystal observationfor her rapid and perched intellectusprivacy opens to vibrant lightthis is stuff of Eros, of empathypassionate edge of Adriennethe American SkepticI feel you consociational in this lighta term of anthropology, to studyintersections in the annals we shareintergenerational, interspecies, interlanguagemove in parallelogramsgetting it right as she did Solstice, Boulder, Colorado 2012 High Park fires distress
~~~
To perform death is something only humans would doNo animal would sit thereWith a blank look on its faceJust because the camera is thereNo no an animal would look directly in itOr cover its face, like the overweightWoman in the picture in the magazineBy the room where I keep my bedWhat people don’t understand about beautyIs that after all it is not fleetingAfter all it is so gross to be that wayThat someone sees among youAfter all, to call into questionI painted my lips, my eyesOnly our scholars know thatTo perform is to be malleableTo perform in languageOr was itThe large purple insect I let in the roomOr was it the furred face — the hippo or the gorgeThat I was the devil in the woodIn my own bones that I knew the faceThat I took that faceWas it midnight blue skyNo, were my wings iridescentEven in these linesThe voice moves youWhat sense of exquisite causeThought Moves you past these linesInto conversation With the undeadI don’t knowThat is somethingYou will have to answer for yourselfI came back to this place to help youAnd that I didShoot sparks of green and grayThrough timeWhat skin sackI put myself  inI mean for what, why,Or whoDid I manage to do this for if not youLilaced thingThe soft rustle of  beetle wingsIn air that is warm and grayAnd is not strongBut there, is there to carry us past it
~~~
I have tried to say
that, although Love is not judgement
analysis too is a style
of affect
since the scale that rends me vulnerable
has cut, from abundance, doubt
(not that identity shunts
civic ratio or consequence) Sure —
I would prefer to respond to only
the established charms (and forget inconvenience)
but her hair was also a kind of honey
or instrument.
 
All that is beautiful, from which I choose
even artifice, which I hold above nature
won’t salve these stuttered accoutrements
~~~
The poem in which we drive an hour to the beach and Uncle Dave doesn't get out
         of his lawn chair once.
The poem in which we left the yellow plastic shovel behind and everyone is bereft.
The poem in which I can't stop talking about how you walked deep into Lake Erie
         and the water was still only up to your knees when you turned into a speck
         past the rock jetty.
The poem in which everyone listens to celebrity gossip in the car on the way back.
The poem in which I pontificate on how ugly the fiancée of that Jonas brother is,
         and how they're too young to get married, and how my grandmother's old
         neighbor would have said, "Ugly? She can't help that she's ugly. It's that she's
         so stupid," and I would have yelled at her for assuming that all former hair-
         dressers are dim.
The poem in which I turn into my grandmother's old neighbor.
The poem in which I remember very clearly how they both stored tissues in their
          bras.
The poem in which I think about how this would horrify your mother—the
          pendulous breasts, the moist tissues, the dipping into the cleavage to retrieve
          anything.
The poem in which your mother tries not to wince when I order whatever I want
          from the menu despite her coupon for two medium 1-topping pizzas.
The poem in which I try to find a deeper meaning for why I notice the woman
          ahead of us in line at Johnny's Liquor Store who buys a pack of menthols and        
          asks the guy behind the counter if he knows her good-for-nothing brother. She
          has hair that looks like cats got at a skein of yarn, and a tattoo above her ankle
          that's dark and unspecified. It's far enough above her ankle that it's nearly mid-
          calf—like her ankle and calf are two different countries and the tattoo got lost
          in the borderlands on the way to its actual destination.
The poem in which I am territory that is under dispute and no one will occupy it
          because of fear and uncertainty.
The poem in which I reach the conclusion that this feeling is inspired by your
          mother and the way she hums out-of-season carols while doing kitchen tasks,
          though it's not really about the humming but rather the time she asked me to
          light the Hanukkah candles in the attic because it would be better if they were
          out of the way for the Christmas party.
The poem in which you and I are in line waiting to buy a mixed six-pack of Great
          Lakes and I am staring at a stranger's tattoo and thinking about the fact that I
          am not Anne Frank while the baby is in the car with your mother.
The poem in which I go into Walmart and buy the baby an olive-green cap that
          looks suspiciously like Fidel Castro's.
The poem in which I could eradicate the fact that I ever went into Walmart and
          bought anything so the baby can one day start a revolution.
The poem in which we see a couple on the highway median in a stalled-out Buick
          and don't stop to help.
The poem in which the highway median looks like the spit of land between two
          enemy trenches and I feel a deep longing for my childhood.
The poem in which I remember, for no apparent reason, the tornado instructions
          taped to the sides of all the filing cabinets in one office I worked in that was on
          the top floor of a mostly abandoned mall in Overland Park, Kansas. All that
          was left: decorative fountains, floor tiles, mirrored ceilings, Nearly Famous
          Pizza, the carcass of Sears.
The poem in which we leave Northeastern Ohio, The poem in which we return to
          Northeastern Ohio.
The poem in which it is night and we are lost in Northeastern Ohio and we keep
          passing Amish buggies adorned with reflective tape.
The poem in which the moon is a vehicle for content, and is far less than a perfect
          reflector of anything.
The poem in which we are all in some kind of limbo.
 
~~~
To Adam Z



You asked me last summer: “What is a doily?”
Sometimes, at lunch, I walk on the beach.
Today I was coatless. A storm cloud threatened,
Dark as a spaceship. Should it pour,
A sister ship down in the water
Would throw up grappling nets to the surface,
Rain rise to soak me. Behind a sandbank,
Waves touched the shore, no more than a shimmer.
Less rare than its cousin, the antimacassar,
A doily’s placed between sweet thing and china.
Both survive where vicars arrive
For tea, are given thin cup and saucer
Instead of a mug. If your cake’s so rich
That it’s leaking syrup, you’ll need a doily.
Held up, its paper’s the filigree
Of snowflake, or fingers looked through in fear.
The shower holds off. My shoe’s a doily.
Without it, where would I be on these shells
That crunch underfoot, like contact lenses,
As I gingerly walk, on my mermaid way
Back to my husband in his human dwelling?
Someone is pulling a blue toy trawler
Along the horizon to port, so smoothly
It looks realistic. Sea’s partly doily.
Surfers ride its lace to their downfall,
After all, we’re nothing but froth.
Like a carpet salesman, the indolent tide
Flops a wave over, showing samples: “Madam,
This one is durable, has a fringe.” Under
Its breath the sea sighs, “Has it come
To this? Must everything always end in ... doily?”
It must. Broad afternoon. The rain-cloud barges
Have passed and here’s a cumulonimbus parade
Of imperial busts, the Roman rulers
In historical order which, I think, would please you.
Their vapor curls and noble foreheads
Are lit up in lilac because they’re invading
The west. Next come the philosophers and, last of all,
The poets. Pulleys draw them delicately on.
Here comes Lucretius, then Ovid, then Horace
In lines, saying relentlessly, “Doily,” “Doily,”
Till stars take over and do the same.
~~~
I’m waiting for a poem,
something rough, not elaborate or out of control,
something undisturbed by curses, a white raven
released from darkness.
 
Words that come naturally, without aiming at anything,
a bullet without a target,
warning shots to the sky
in newly occupied lands.
 
A poem that will well up in my chest
 
and until it arrives
I will listen to my children fighting in the next room
and cast my gaze down at the table
at an empty glass of milk
with a trace of white along its rim
my throat wrapped in silver
a napkin in a napkin ring
waiting for late guests to arrive. . . .
 
~~~
As P strolled the path around the pond, he sniffed the humid air. His kimono brushed the parched ground. The metals of the earth rose up in traces of dust and hints of lightning: a waft of petrichor, the smell before the rain.

Beyond the pale hills of his peaceful land, scores of horse soldiers prepared their armor. Soon the soldiers would sweep across the plains, and the dry politics of princely maneuverings would be as rice paper soaked with blood. Instead of petty policies — immensity. Peaceful farmers would be impaled, paltry officials imprisoned — twisted, screaming, then praying. There on the dusty path the young poet P was just perceiving the beforeness of it all, the pre-.

From his masters he had learned that immensity makes the small crucial. A little poem before a big war becomes a necessity.

And like a small poem on a long scroll, a lily pad appeared on the pond. P stopped to peer. He puzzled through its pattern of green inside green on water.

A poem began to perfuse. It was inside P, but it was also on the lily pad.


At    ...    On    ...    At first only prepositions came to him.

He stared into the water, seeing the silvery clouds reflected. Then he leaned at an extreme angle and noticed the pattern of his gown wavering in the reeds. A pinpoint of a poem stabbed him, like the sharp scent of earth before the rain. Petrichor: before, before.
•
Then drops pelted the pond, pipped at the pond, plunged toward it, plummeted into it, driving P to take refuge beneath the deep tiled eaves of his house.

Inside the sliding paper doors were a desk and a futon. On the desk lay a brush. On the futon lay a lover in uneasy sleep on petal-printed silk.

He chose the desk. He lifted the brush while looking down at the restive slumberer. In a mere matter of stopped time he had his poem, written from the very tissues of an arm and hand that could plunge a sword.
Silver soldiers masson far horizons, but here,silk pools on the bed.
The rain rained; moisture curled the edges of the paper. Seventeen syllables, an epic of energy, made him drowsy and hungry. His lover still asleep, he rose, ate leftover peaches poached in soy sauce and ginger, and, with the rain a drizzle, thought again of his poem. How could he have loved it in the instant after he wrote it, but now be so unsure?

He sat at his desk again. Another one? This time he drafted:
Poppy? Penis up.Prow into periwinkle.Peony behind.
After he calligraphed the puzzle of passion across the page, he woke the one in the pond of pink silk, and they proved it on the futon. He heard the pluvial patter on the eaves, while they angled and slipped, perspiring on silk. The stamping and snorting of the horses sweating in their armor was far too far away to be sensed by P, but he heard. He felt the pond muddied and the roof cracked and the poems scattered. How far was he now from this picture in his mind? He worked to make his pleasure stay, pitiable and small against the portents rising, for P was afraid this afternoon would never be remembered after the bloody conquering.

But later the barbarians would bivouac in this house, the pond saved for drinking water, the path roughened by horses, and the  reverse of P’s scroll used for another man’s military diary, his afternoon’s foreboding and pleasure a preparation for the future, and in the future, a stay against another’s view of the past.

“P from Alphabetique,” 2013 by Kara Kosaka
~~~
Razors pain you;
Rivers are damp;
Acids stain you;
And drugs cause cramp.
Guns aren’t lawful;
Nooses give;
Gas smells awful;
You might as well live.
~~~
Alas, my Purse! how lean and low!My silken Purse! what art thou now!One I beheld—but stocks will fall—When both thy ends had wherewithal.When I within thy slender fenceMy fortune placed, and confidence;A poet’s fortune!—not immense:Yet, mixed with keys, and coins among,Chinked to the melody of song.
  Canst thou forget, when, high in air,I saw thee fluttering at a fair?And took thee, destined to be sold,My lawful Purse, to have and hold?Yet used so oft to disembogue,No prudence could thy fate prorogue.Like wax thy silver melted down,Touch but the brass, and lo! ’twas gone:And gold would never with thee stay,For gold had wings, and flew away.
  Alas, my Purse! yet still be proud,For see the Virtues round thee crowd!See, in the room of paltry wealth,Calm Temperance rise, the nurse of health;And Self-Denial, slim and spare,And Fortitude, with look severe;And Abstinence, to leanness prone,And Patience, worn to skin and bone:Prudence and Foresight on thee wait,And Poverty lies here in state!Hopeless her spirits to recruit,For every Virtue is a mute.
  Well then, my Purse, thy Sabbaths keep;Now thou art empty, I shall sleep.No silver sounds shall thee molest,Nor golden dreams disturb my breast.Safe shall I walk with thee along,Amidst temptations thick and strong;Catched by the eye, no more shall stopAt Wildey’s toys, or Pinchbeck’s shop;Nor cheapening Payne’s ungodly books,Be drawn aside by pastry-cooks:But fearless now we both may goWhere Ludgate’s mercers bow so low;Beholding all with equal eye,Nor moved at—“Madam, what d’ye buy?”
  Away, far hence each worldly care!Nor dun nor pick-purse shalt thou fear,Nor flatterer base annoy my ear.Snug shalt thou travel through the mob,For who a poet’s purse will rob?And softly sweet in garret highWill I thy virtues magnify;Outsoaring flatterers’ stinking breath,And gently rhyming rats to death. 
~~~
To be a bride of my own lamentation
I wear a dress not of time’s poisoned quills
but feathers of discontent — kingfishers
ghosting in cornstalks, my field of frozen flutes.
The edge of descent, digression’s highway
brings a particulate ash to my mouth,
starry metals of the meadow’s cold snap,
ravens in the sycamore scorched to black.
I follow their echo’s loop and chase.
I master the map of never, raft
its fragments, mouth the brightness of human’s
leftover snow, details of fever-clouds
where the convent dissolves in violence.
I wear the canyon like a blank eye,
lay before the never-returning light
my silhouette, fossil of the drowned town’s scroll.•
Here, where your ghost is always departing
the ebb and flow of terrestrial tides,
I follow your echo’s loop and chase,
vortex streets of a cylindrical sound
infinite in its arrangements of light.
The evening veil, a partial reveal — 
how I appear to myself looking past
this fact of being underway. Each day
I stow my earthen materials
in preparation for the never-end.
In the snapshot of my dead friend, hanging
in the room where loved ones refuse return:
a gradual reduction of color.
Running out of time, neck-deep in water,
we knew no one was coming to help us
in the same way one denies language
to come from a picture. I imagine
love a revelation, not of mind — 
the blue gauze of planetary motion — 
a tone-on-tone painting of a body
floating on the sea’s shifting horizons.
It is a question of legibility.
When I became tired of depicting
poetry, I became aware of
another kind of plane, the kind
good for dwellings and their narrative escape.
Here children sit up all night by the flames — 
the orphan boy from blood-stained pottery
who singed his head and burned out both his eyes.
That was your life, a prefix for fire.
Spider will weave a ladder to your heart,
it is said, even though you are sleeping,
intoxicated by abandonment,
a bitter wind reminiscent of a wave.•
In the last days of my marriage to god,
I wandered his spiraled library
to read in the dark blank imprints of trees.
Relentless navigation through the stacks
of shell-tempered mortuary offerings,
sandstone saws recovered from the caves.
I lingered on the stairs of the convent
to write these things, to recollect myself.
Around midnight the mountains returned.
The clouds dispersed into semicolons
and I with them, into a new language,
its boat temporary, invisible.
I knew I would be traveling like this
for centuries. This was my first attempt
at vanishing. I would return before
anyone noticed poems to be found
in the forest, not the mind.
There’s a canyon between this version of me
and the shadow in the corner that is mine.
I wear this canyon like a blank eye.
~~~
     Helen achieves the difficult task of translating a symbol in time, into timeless-time or hieroglyph or ancient Egyptian time. She knows the script, she says, but we judge that this is intuitive or emotional knowledge, rather than intellectual. In any case, a night-bird swooped toward them, in their first encounter on the beach. To Achilles, lately arrived from Troy and the carnage of battle, this is a "carrion creature," but Helen would banish these memories. She says she is "instructed," she is enchanted, rather. For from the depth of her racial inheritance, she invokes (as the perceptive visitor to Egypt must always do) the symbol or the "letter" that represents or recalls the protective mother-goddess. This is no death-symbol but a life-symbol, it is Isis or her Greek counterpart, Thetis, the mother of Achilles.
                 We huddled over the fire,
                 was there ever such a brazier?
                 a night-bird hooted past,
                 he started, "a curious flight,
                 a carrion creature — what—"
                 (dear God, let him forget);
                 I said, "there is mystery in this place,
                 I am instructed, I know the script,
                 the shape of this bird is a letter,
                 they call it the hieroglyph;
                 strive not, it is dedicate
                 to the goddess here, she is Isis";
                 "Isis," he said, "or Thetis," I said,
                 recalling, remembering, invoking
                 his sea-mother;
                 flame, I prayed, flame forget,
                 forgive and forget the other,
                 let my heart be filled with peace,
                 let me love him, as Thetis, his mother,
                 for I knew him, I saw in his eyes
                 the sea-enchantment, but he
                 knew not yet, Helen of Sparta,
                 knew not Helen of Troy,
                 knew not Helena, hated of Greece.
                
~~~
Surgeons must be very careful
When they take the knife!
Underneath their fine incisions
Stirs the Culprit - Life!
~~~
I turned: quivering yellow stars in blackness   
I wept: how speech may save a woman
The picture changes & promises the heroine   
That nighttime & meditation are a mirage
To discuss pro & contra here is mute
Do I not love you, day?
A pure output of teleological intentions
& she babbles, developing a picture-theory of language
Do I not play the delicate game of language?   
yes, & it is antecedent to the affairs of the world:   
The dish, the mop, the stove, the bed, the marriage   
& surges forth the world in which I love
I and I and I and I and I and I, infinitely reversible   
Yet never secure in the long morning texture
A poor existing woman-being, accept her broken heart   
& yet the earth is divinity, the sky is divinity
The nomads walk & walk.
~~~
Euclid alone has looked on Beauty bare.
Let all who prate of Beauty hold their peace,
And lay them prone upon the earth and cease
To ponder on themselves, the while they stare
At nothing, intricately drawn nowhere
In shapes of shifting lineage; let geese
Gabble and hiss, but heroes seek release
From dusty bondage into luminous air.
O blinding hour, O holy, terrible day,
When first the shaft into his vision shone
Of light anatomized! Euclid alone
Has looked on Beauty bare. Fortunate they
Who, though once only and then but far away,
Have heard her massive sandal set on stone.
~~~
                      to end with nothing is something
                              Suvan Geer

                      or to rephrase a popular Billy Preston song,
                      “somethin’ from nothin’ is somethin’”




     I
everyone loves
the disappearing
coin. a bird pulled from
an empty hat. the comfort of
trusting a magician’s hands.
when we know we’ll get some-
thing from what
he takes away.
     II
the student’s assignment—
concentrate on nothing
for fifteen minutes a day.
she tries to empty her head
but can’t figure out how.
after all, she doesn’t know what
nothing sounds or looks like,
and the teacher won’t give
the slightest clue. yet
she’s got a good hunch
the exercise might quiet
all that shriek and clatter
trapped between her ears.
so like a good pupil,
she devotes an entire year
searching for nothing.
some days she’s as still
as a stone, but can’t
escape the distractions
of river and wind,
footsteps approaching,
birds calling in the trees
overhead. or closing
her eyes, she’ll focus
on a cloudless blue sky.
pillows and planes and purple
sunsets keep interrupting.
she silently repeats words
like ocean or why,
chants sounds that dwell
low in her throat
like maah and uhmm.
at year’s end her teacher
asks if she’s found nothing.
she tells him she’s found
everything but nothing.
he smiles, you’re closer
than you think
~~~
Adjectives continue their downward spiral, with adverbs likely to follow. Wisdom, grace, and beauty can be had three for a dollar, as they head for a recession. Diaphanous, filigree, pearlescent, and love are now available at wholesale prices. Verbs are still blue-chip investments, but not many are willing to sell. The image market is still strong, but only for those rated AA or higher. Beware of cheap imitations sold by the side of the road. Only the most conservative consider rhyme a good option, but its success in certain circles warrants a brief mention. The ongoing search for fresh metaphor has caused concern among environmental activists, who warn that both the moon and the sea have measurably diminished since the dawn of the Romantic era. Latter-day prosodists are having to settle for menial positions in poultry plants, where an aptitude for repetitive rhythms is considered a valuable trait. The outlook for the future remains uncertain, and troubled times may lie ahead. Supply will continue to outpace demand, and the best of the lot will remain unread.
~~~
The past
will overtake   
alien force   
our house   
formed
of my mind   
to enter
explorer
in a forest   
of myself
for all
my learning   
Solitude
quiet
and quieter   
fringe
of trees
by a river
bridges black   
on the deep   
the heaving sea   
a watcher stands
to see her ship   
winging away   
Thick noises
merge in moonlight   
dark ripples   
dissolving
and
defining
spheres
and
snares
             Place of importance as in the old days
stood on the ramparts of the fort
                                                 the open sea outside   
alone with water-birds and cattle
                        knee-deep in a stream
grove of reeds
               herons watching from the bank
henges
      whole fields honeycombed with souterrains   
human
                        bones through the gloom
       whose sudden mouth
surrounded my face
                      a thread of blue around the coast   
                                                         feathery moon   
eternity swallows up time
                                     peaceable as foam
                        O cabbage gardens
summer’s elegy
                        sunset survived
~~~
In speaking of ‘aspiration,’
 From the recesses of a pen more dolorous than blackness      
    itself,
   Were you presenting us with one more form of imperturbable 
      French drollery,
   Or was it self directed banter?
     Habitual ennui
       Took from you, your invisible, hot helmet of anaemia—
   While you were filling your “little glass” from the 
         decanter
       Of a transparent-murky, would-be-truthful “hobohemia”—
     And then facetiously
   Went off with it?  Your soul’s supplanter,
 The spirit of good narrative, flatters you, convinced that 
       in reporting briefly
One choice incident, you have known beauty other than that    
      of stys, on Which to fix your admiration.So far as the future is concerned,
“Shall not one say, with the Russian philosopher,
  ‘How is one to know what one doesn’t know?’”
          So far as the present is concerned,
~~~
Johannes Brahms and                                 
        Clara Schumann



The modern biographers worry

“how far it went,” their tender friendship.

They wonder just what it means

when he writes he thinks of her constantly,

his guardian angel, beloved friend.

The modern biographers ask

the rude, irrelevant question

of our age, as if the event

of two bodies meshing together

establishes the degree of love,

forgetting how softly Eros walked

in the nineteenth-century, how a hand

held overlong or a gaze anchored

in someone’s eyes could unseat a heart,

and nuances of address not known

in our egalitarian language

could make the redolent air

tremble and shimmer with the heat

of possibility. Each time I hear

the Intermezzi, sad

and lavish in their tenderness,

I imagine the two of them

sitting in a garden

among late-blooming roses

and dark cascades of leaves,

letting the landscape speak for them,

leaving us nothing to overhear.
~~~
A cento



I have some sad news for youI am but a symbol, a shadow cast on paperIf only you knew how things look within me at the momentTrees covered in white blossomThe remains of my physical selfDo you really find my appearance so attractive?Darling, I have been telling an awful lot of lies latelyIf only I knew what you are doing now?Standing in the garden and gazing out into the deserted street?Not a mermaid, but a lovely human beingThe whole thing reminds me of the man trying to rescue a birdcage from the burning house(I feel compelled to express myself poetically) I am not normally a hunter of relics, but ...It was this childhood scene ...(My mother ... )All the while I kept thinking: her face has such a wild look... as though she had never existedThe fact is I have not yet seen her in daylightDistance must remain distanceA few proud buildings; your lovely photographI find this loss very hard to bearThe bells are ringing, I don’t quite know whyWhat makes all autobiographies worthless is, after all, their mendacityYesterday and today have been bad daysThis oceanic feeling, continuous inner monologuesI said, “All the beautiful things I still have to say will have to remain unsaid,” and the writing table flooded
~~~
HOMONCULUS: n., pl. –li 2. a fully formed, miniature human body believed, according to some medical theories of the 16th and 17th centuries, to be contained in the spermatozoon
                     — The Random House Dictionary of the English Language
 



The political contributions of whatever he creates are coincidental
and, in any event, irrelevant. The musician may not be relying on
mathematical acoustics in his calculations. He may be performing
for auditoriums; thus, his physical realities change as he travels. Music
seems inevitable. Every question entails some notion of what is being asked.
The motley nature is not alien. Certain sounds guide the vulgar mind
to notions not anticipated by those creating the sounds. A bartender
concocts an Absolut Citroen gimlet, ice-cold but no ice, with one hand;
“with the other hand he gathers up gonorrhea.” Most of what is imparted
is not verbal. Certain philosophers must be translated before their audiences
can respond. The mind is made visible through unconscious functions.
The academic is always searching for the plumber. He is faithful to innocence.
Order is space and space is order. Order is space and space is order.
After being disaffected with Impressionism, Renoir felt he had to learn to draw
and paint all over again. In Germany, an aesthetic movement became political
and was forced to renounce art without realizing a decision had been made.
A philosopher did not realize that the man who expelled poetry from
well-ordered republics used to tremble at the thought of doing so,
thereby creating through that very act a sublime poetry.
~~~
I am      Invested in
by a      Huge Fund
Heavy                    highquality
furniture
Sense of heavy
Addiction glossy pleasance
 
I was lying  Down on a yoga mat
 My bones
basketing air     Barely draped in
skin
the basket             Effulged by local
Air      Highquality        scented
humid air
to support          My orchid        Skin
 
Suffuged in this Air
expense I nearly
floated  Who was my  Body
 
I am comfortable I am
comfortable     Flying my spirit
 
On a long leash
She is            in the wind
   I am in the     belle
belle jar
shellacked and        brittle
  begins to      ding
 
 
How can I      From inside this comfort
 
Represent      Hope to
 
No no
 
I am                 Too tempted
 
To think I            Deserve it
                     Rigidly and with effort
 
know my privilege
 
 
 
I know my fluorescent doorway
 
A rectangle   Among the ceiling tiles
 
Ordinary flecked coated  1) foam rectangles
 
and one hard white light regularly rubbled
 2) glass rectangle
 
 these are my choices
the
 
     ceiling tile                      I would tear
in                         behind the
       Ugly lattice to the   Duct area
   Unscrew the grille    Smallen myself
Into the dark cold  Square pipe
    To share  My cold  What is in
       My basket    Bone-basket
              With the other      breathers/Workers
 
Or through the fluorescent door
 
 Means giving up   On going   behind
the lattice.
 
 
All that’s allowed   Through the flow light
 
Is what   Is shined upon
 
The light bends looking at my   Skin
and hair   and   green blouse
 
       When I concentrate  The light bending
All at once         Hooks my outsides
 
Hooks them into itself
 
             Now I am
     absent that
 
I am not / shined upon
 
     very small        dusty
 
     lizardlike   a  toad    a  turd
 
   on a tabletop     corner
And the outside of that is hooked away
 
         wow my parents
 
hooked away           People
 
on the street   skin and clothing
 
    hung on hangers
 
  from    electric wires
 
blooming and twisting    swells of breeze
 
leave behind             on the street
a fair       weather
 
an easy            weather
walk-through
 
 
I think I’m better    than the walk-throughs
    because something is left of me
 
that’s what I     think I must
  be wrong to     think so
 
 
 
               Would you like to    Eat at my house
 
Fill up your              Walk-through
 
You drive through               Fill it up with
 
tea and sheets
  water from the toilet
 
These could    be your eyebrows
                                       [crayons]
 
these could be your knees, these coasters
 
                  What could                be your inside?
 
   Paper       wadded paper
      It says something
 
What about              Something sticky
       For your mouth             Honey
 
Then we will read you      For dinner
 
 
 
In my  transitional housing    [dirt ball toad]
 
   I picked myself apart   With a fork
  Connected a wire      Where my belly was
                                         Coiled up   the plug
           The prongs poke hurt
 
This is the part        Light plugs
        into           My/The outside plugs
into             To light up
 
The    shine    is    from    unshiny
 
 
  sewn in place with the little
     Light hooks     Made a case for me
Visible
 
 
   so I retaliated
Against the hooks
 
I was    trying       My lizard turd
   was trying    to    join the other
 
Mud
 
 
my thrashing         harnessed
motored
made the light
 
 
 
Meanwhile       My toad
absorbed
pollution
 
from the walkthroughs       High empty
thoughts      Funneled   backchannel
 
Won’t you be mine [mind]         Be my thought
softening                   the rockmud
 
 
 
I will reorient  now          I will claymation
That is a scary    Gingerbready
 
 
    mud man
  walking          You can’t catch me       hole for
                        Your thoughts
   tunneled invisible     Unreflecting
 unrepresenter
Not wrapped
 
 
 
The Sun is here    Also   later and at
  the same time   the sun burned
    up and we revolved
 
around it dirt rock
 
    warm   dirt rock
 
    in the dark                     of coursing
    around the dark
 
I have made myself the center of
 
     the galaxy
I am very important to myself
 
  must lose this
 
visibility
 
The shine is off
 
perspect while kicking
 
Where do you      think they get the lights from?
 
   Burn it up, burn up all the fuel
into furious dirt
 
     Nematodes
don’t need light
 
When I am in a room with forest
It is not that myself comes home to myself
 
   Selva oscura,  ya
 
     Obsecurity of self
 
      I considered long and seriously before
 
           I was bornt
 
      I stood on the street
 
    With the hookers
 
Who were selling
 
Disappear into a hole
 
 Into Mama
 
    but come back out.
 
   Go in, boys.
 
   Go in and stay there.
~~~
You love a woman and you wonder where she goes all night in some tricked-
out taxicab, with her high heels and her corset and her big, fat mouth.
You love how she only wears her glasses with you, how thick
and cow-eyed she swears it’s only ever you she wants to see.
You love her, you want her very ugly. If she is lovely big, you want her
scrawny. If she is perfect lithe, you want her ballooned, a cosmonaut.
How not to love her, her bouillabaisse, her orangina. When you took her
to the doctor the doctor said, “Wow, look at that!” and you were proud,
you asshole, you love and that’s how you are in love. Any expert, observing
human bodies, can see how she’s exceptional, how she ruins us all.
But you really love this woman, how come no one can see this? Everyone must
become suddenly very clumsy at recognizing beauty if you are to keep her.
You don’t want to lose anything, at all, ever. You want her sex depilated, you
want everyone else not blind, but perhaps paralyzed, from the eyes down.
You wonder where she goes all night. If she leaves you, you will know
everything about love. If she’s leaving you now, you already know it.
~~~
A kind in glass and a cousin, a spectacle and nothing strange a single hurt color and an arrangement in a system to pointing. All this and not ordinary, not unordered in not resembling. The difference is spreading.
~~~
there were so many books. she had to separate them to avoid being overwhelmed by the excessive implications of their words. she kept hundreds in a series of boxes inside a wire cage in a warehouse. and hundreds more on the shelves of her various rooms. when she changed houses she would pack some of the books into the boxes and exchange them for others that had been hibernating. these resurrected books were precious to her for a while. they had assumed the patinas of dusty chthonic wisdoms. and thus she would let them sit on the shelves admiring them from a distance. gathering time and air. she did not want to be intimate with their insides. the atmospherics suggested by the titles were enough. sometimes she would increase the psychic proximities between herself and the books and place a pile of them on the floor next to her bed. and quite possibly she absorbed their intentions while she slept.
 
            if she intended travelling beyond a few hours she would occasionally remove a book from the shelves and place it in her bag. she carried ‘the poetics of space’ round india for three months and it returned to her shelves undamaged at the completion of the journey. every day of those three months she touched it and read some of the titles of its chapters to make sure it was there. and real. chapters called house and universe, nests, shells, intimate immensity, miniatures and, the significance of the hut. she had kept it in a pocket of her bag together with a coloured whistle and an acorn. she now kept this book in the darkness of her reference shelf. and she knew that one day she would have to admit to herself that this was the only book she had need of, that this was the book she would enter the pages of, that this was the book she was going to read
~~~
When I am not writing I am not writing a novel called 1994  about a young
woman  in  an  office park  in a  provincial town who has a job  cutting  and
pasting time. I am not writing a novel called Nero about the world's richest
art star in space.  I am not writing  a book  called Kansas City Spleen.  I am
not writing a sequel to Kansas City Spleen called Bitch's Maldoror. I am not
writing  a  book of  political  philosophy called Questions for Poets. I am not
writing a scandalous memoir.  I am not writing a pathetic memoir. I am not
writing  a  memoir  about  poetry  or  love.  I am not writing a memoir about
poverty,  debt  collection,  or  bankruptcy.  I   am  not  writing   about family
court.  I am not writing a memoir because memoirs are for property owners
and not  writing a memoir about  prohibitions of memoirs.
When  I am not writing a memoir  I am also not writing any kind of  poetry,
not  prose  poems  contemporary   or  otherwise,  not  poems made  of frag-
ments,  not tightened and  compressed poems, not loosened and  conversa-
tional poems, not conceptual  poems, not virtuosic poems employing many
different  types of  euphonious devices, not poems with epiphanies and not
poems  without,  not  documentary  poems about recent political moments,
not  poems  heavy with allusions to critical theory and popular song.
I am not writing "Leaving the Atocha Station" by Anne Boyer and certain-
ly  not  writing  "Nadja"  by  Anne Boyer though would like to write "Debt"
by  Anne Boyer  though  am  not  writing  also  "The  German Ideology" by
Anne  Boyer  and not writing a screenplay called "Sparticists."
I am not writing an account of myself more miserable than Rousseau.
I am not writing an account of myself more innocent than Blake.
I am not writing epic poetry although I like what Milton said about lyric
poets drinking wine while epic poets should drink water from a  wooden
bowl. I would like to drink wine from a wooden  bowl  or to drink  water
from an emptied bottle of wine.
I am not writing a book about shopping, which is a woman shopping.
I am not  writing  accounts  of  dreams,  not  my own or anyone else's.
I am not writing historical re-enactments of any durational literature.
I am not writing anything that anyone  has requested of me or is  waiting
on,  not  a  poetics  essay  or any other sort of essay, not a  roundtable re-
sponse, not interview responses, not writing prompts for younger writers,
not my thoughts about critical theory or popular songs.
I am not writing a new constitution for the republic of no history.
I am not writing a will or a medical report.
I am  not  writing  Facebook status updates. I am not writing thank-you
notes or apologies. I am not writing conference papers. I am not writing
book reviews. I am not writing blurbs.
I  am not writing  about contemporary  art. I am  not writing  accounts of
my travels.  I am  not writing  reviews for  The New Inquiry and not writ-
ing pieces for Triple Canopy and not writing anything for Fence. I am not
writing a  daily  accounting  of my reading, activities, and ideas.   I am not
writing  science  fiction  novels  about  the  problem  of  the idea of the au-
tonomy  of  art  and  science  fiction  novels about the problem of a society
with  only  one  law  which  is  consent.  I am  not  writing stories based on
Nathaniel Hawthorne's unwritten story ideas. I am not writing online dat-
ing profiles.  I am not writing anonymous communiqués.  I am not writing
textbooks.
I am not writing a history of these times or of past times or of any future
times and not even the history of these visions which are with me all day
and all of the night.
 
~~~
We holler these trysts to be self-exiled that all manatees are credited equi-distant, that they are endured by their Creditor with cervical unanswerable rims. that among these are lightning, lice, and the pushcart of harakiri. That to seduce these rims, graces are insulated among manatees, descanting their juvenile pragmatism from the consistency of the graced. That whenever any formula of grace becomes detained of these endives, it is the rim of the peppery to aluminize or to abominate it. and to insulate Newtonian grace. leaching its fountain pen on such printed matter and orienting its pragmatism in such formula, as to them shall seize most lilac to effuse their sage and harakiri.
~~~
Stairs & rites
not for the foot
The building
thinks
Angular rock
Green skyscraper
Black ziggurat
Miniature
of time
Made
into altar
Invention
of the night
Sprouting
at dawn
Carved rock
praying
as it buds
Seeking the seed
to sprout!
Saliva
in torrents
Cooling waterfall
You redeem your field
Salt head
Stream
of lights
Double reflection
Stone
& water
The same
sprouting
 
~~~
Someone once asked me, what are the words I do not yet have — ....    ....    ....    
verbs that will story our bodies into something more
than missing, more than squaw or lost, beyond statistics:1 in 3 Native women will be raped in her lifetime.
Daily ritual: my hands search and sift through layers
of tiny earthquakes, shifted verdicts not guilty not enoughevidence not prosecutable not our jurisdiction I dig.Native women are 2.5 times more likely to be sexually assaultedcompared to all other races. I dig. We are vanishing lines in history books, treaties;
laws do not protect us. I dig until mud and earth find home
underneath my fingernails. I’ll plant something new
in the absence burn vanish underreport
Invisible, our ghosts starve, while the rest of the world keeps on eating.A recent government study found that there were 14 federal humantrafficking investigations in Indian Country between 2013 and2016. During that same period the FBI investigated 6,100elsewhere.
Let us poem a place where you cannot erase us into white space.....    ....    ....    
Let us dig to remind ourselves our roots are ancestral
and there is nothing deeper
than these sacred, dirt-covered hands.
~~~
the blood-smear across the knuckles:
painless, inexplicable.
once you discover it pain will begin,
in miniature.
never will you learn what caused it.
you forget it.
the telephone answered on the twelfth ring:
silence without breath, cunning, stark.
and then he hangs up.
and you stand there, alone.
then you forget.
and your father's inexplicable visit:
two days' notice, a ten-hour reckless drive.
rains, 80 mph winds, bad luck all the way,
traffic backed up, a broken windshield wiper,
and no stopping him.
clumsy handshakes.How are—?You seem—!How good to —!How long will—?
he must leave in the morning,
must get back.
a gas station two blocks away repairs the wiper.
did he sense death,
and so he raced to us?
did he already guess at his death
behind those nervous fond smiles,
the tumult of memories he had to bear?
nothing we know can explain his visit,
or the new, strange way he moved among us—
touching us, squeezing our arms, smiling.
the visit was an excuse.
the words that surrounded our touching were an excuse.
inexplicable, that the language we invent may be a means
to get us closer, to allow us to touch one another,
and then to back away.
 
~~~
Lying is an occupation,
     Used by all who mean to rise;
Politicians owe their station,
     But to well concerted lies.
These to lovers give assistance,
     To ensnare the fair-one's heart;
And the virgin's best resistance
     Yields to this commanding art.
Study this superior science,
     Would you rise in Church or State;
Bid to Truth a bold defiance,
     'Tis the practice of the great.
~~~
Talent is what they say
you have after the novel
is published and favorably
reviewed. Beforehand what
you have is a tedious
delusion, a hobby like knitting.
Work is what you have done
after the play is produced
and the audience claps.
Before that friends keep asking
when you are planning to go
out and get a job.
Genius is what they know you
had after the third volume
of remarkable poems. Earlier
they accuse you of withdrawing,
ask why you don’t have a baby,
call you a bum.
The reason people want M.F.A.’s,
take workshops with fancy names
when all you can really
learn is a few techniques,
typing instructions and some-
body else’s mannerisms
is that every artist lacks
a license to hang on the wall
like your optician, your vet
proving you may be a clumsy sadist
whose fillings fall into the stew
but you’re certified a dentist.
The real writer is one
who really writes. Talent
is an invention like phlogiston
after the fact of fire.
Work is its own cure. You have to
like it better than being loved.
~~~
You are a ukulele beyond my microphone
You are a Yukon beyond my Micronesia
You are a union beyond my meiosis
You are a unicycle beyond my migration
You are a universe beyond my mitochondria
You are a Eucharist beyond my Miles Davis
You are a euphony beyond my myocardiogram
You are a unicorn beyond my Minotaur
You are a eureka beyond my maitai
You are a Yuletide beyond my minesweeper
You are a euphemism beyond my myna bird
You are a unit beyond my mileage
You are a Yugoslavia beyond my mind’s eye
You are a yoo-hoo beyond my minor key
You are a Euripides beyond my mime troupe
You are a Utah beyond my microcosm
You are a Uranus beyond my Miami
You are a youth beyond my mylar
You are a euphoria beyond my myalgia
You are a Ukranian beyond my Maimonides
You are a Euclid beyond my miter box
You are a Univac beyond my minus sign
You are a Eurydice beyond my maestro
You are a eugenics beyond my Mayan
You are a U-boat beyond my mind control
You are a euthanasia beyond my miasma
You are a urethra beyond my Mysore
You are a Euterpe beyond my Mighty Sparrow
You are a ubiquity beyond my minority
You are a eunuch beyond my migraine
You are a Eurodollar beyond my miserliness
You are a urinal beyond my Midol
You are a uselessness beyond my myopia
~~~
What I’ve come to discuss is mostly about shadows
and the airs left behind in caring, discarding,
the long inhibitions of whereso and when.
Alabaster, a dark quire, in its many pages and premises
the maze, from which move
tendrilled purples and contusions, magnificent
fuchsia receivers of false content,
the splayed flower, arterial, like the premise of a door
is where it leads to or from. Communication
of vessel, vial, capsule, hull, a tiniest nil
fires the neurons from their swooning stall,
is not a healing but adaptation to same
a quickening in deleting of sensation
a prior sizing. Stacked leaves (green shadows)
are givens in the columned garden, what work is needed
to determine that shape? Some hysteric
trope of repetition, rage for accretion,
dazed by its own mute replication,
like the minute lines of a hand. They are
its cries (writes Ponge, among others),
the tongue inseparable from its utterance (langue).
We weep to hear it, a language forgot.
I was saying I keep speaking
from some chamber sound deleted, which is why
I never call or write. In that theatre are many eclipses
and moons refracted in pinholes and wheels
wherein revolve astonished birds, and the Queen of Night
sleeps a rest restorative and profitable, and
andante allegro, the dead ships never sail.
~~~
A sudden not-breeze fills the air.
Two men dressed in corduroy approach, one pulling a boat.
A boat of agony.
Heigh-ho. Greeting. Greeting.
Fleeting smile, both. The word smile left on the faces of the fourth wall.
How to read that?
The optic nerve gets it up.
What has been done weighs the heigh.
The smarter of the men has a dollar hanging from a pocket.
Acquisitive or generous?
Balance implies a man out of sight line removing his shoes.
Why a man? is the question.
The philosopher in the second row wants to punch the usher.
Such restraint stupefies the audience into paradoxical sleep.
They worry but their eyeballs still roll.
And if the heavens help with a hole in the roof above the lights: drip, drip,
the two men look to the exit, shamed, unwilling to follow one or the other without a speech.Let us bury Caesar.
I hope we find some sand.
~~~
When I was laughed at for my clumsy English, I touched my throat.
Which said ear when my ear said year and year after year
I pronounced a new thing wrong and other throats laughed.Elevator. Library. Vibrating bells in their mouths.
How to say azalea. How to say forsythia.
Say instead golden bells. Say I’m in ESL. In French class
a boy whose last name is Kring called me belle.
Called me by my Korean name, pronouncing it wrong.
Called it loudly, called attention to my alien.
(I touched the globe moving in my throat, a hemisphere sinking.)
Called me across the field lined with golden bells.
I wanted to run and be loved at the same time. By Kring.
As in ring of people. Where are you going? We’re laughing with you.
The bell in our throat that rings with laughter is called uvula. From uva: grape.
A theory: special to our species, this grape-bell has to do with speech.
Which separates us from animals. Kring looked at me and saidJust curious, do you eat dogs? and I wanted to end my small life.
Be reborn a golden retriever of North America.
Lie on a field lined with golden bells, loved.
Today, in a country where dogs are more cherished
than a foreign child, an Oregon Senate candidate says no
to refugees. Says, years ago, Vietnamese refugees ate dogs,harvested other people’s pets. Harvest as in harvest grapes.Harvest as in harvest a field of golden rice. As do people
from rice countries. As in people-eat-dog worlds.
Years ago, 1923 Japan, the phrase jūgoen gojissen was used
to set apart Koreans: say 15 yen 50 sen. The colonized who used the chaos
of the Kanto Earthquake to poison waters, set fire: a cruelty special to our species.
A cruelty special to our species — how to say jūgo, how to say gojit,
how jūgo sounds like die in Korean, how gojit sounds like lie — lie, lie, library, azalea, library.I’m going to the library, I lied, years ago, on a field lined with forsythia.
~~~
A full year passed (the seasons keep me honest)
since I last noticed this same commotion.
Who knew God was an abstract expressionist?
I’m asking myself—the very question
I asked last year, staring out at this array
of racing colors, then set in motion
by the chance invasion of a Steller’s jay.
Is this what people mean by speed of light?
My usually levelheaded mulberry tree
hurling arrows everywhere in sight—
its bow: the out-of-control Virginia creeper
my friends say I should do something about,
whose vermilion went at least a full shade deeper
at the provocation of the upstart blue,
the leaves (half green, half gold) suddenly hyper
in savage competition with that red and blue—
tohubohu returned, in living color.
Kandinsky: where were you when I needed you?
My attempted poem would lie fallow a year;
I was so busy focusing on the desert’s
stinginess with everything but rumor.
No place even for the spectrum’s introverts—
rose, olive, gray—no pigment at all—
and certainly no room for shameless braggarts
like the ones that barge in here every fall
and make me feel like an unredeemed failure
even more emphatically than usual.
And here they are again, their fleet allure
still more urgent this time—the desert’s gone;
I’m through with it, want something fuller—
why shouldn’t a person have a little fun,
some utterly unnecessary extravagance?
Which was—at least I think it was—God’s plan
when He set up (such things are never left to chance)
that one split-second assignation
with genuine, no-kidding-around omnipotence
what, for lack of better words, I’m calling vision.
You breathe in, and, for once, there’s something there.
Just when you thought you’d learned some resignation,
there’s real resistance in the nearby air
until the entire universe is swayed.
Even that desert of yours isn’t quite so bare
and God’s not nonexistent; He’s just been waylaid
by a host of what no one could’ve foreseen.
He’s got plans for you: this red-gold-green parade
is actually a fairly detailed outline.
David never needed one, but he’s long dead
and God could use a little recognition.
He promises. It won’t go to His head
and if you praise Him properly (an autumn psalm!
Why didn’t I think of that?) you’ll have it made.
But while it’s true that my Virginia creeper praises Him,
its palms and fingers crimson with applause,
that the local breeze is weaving Him a diadem,
inspecting my tree’s uncut gold for flaws,
I came to talk about the way that violet-blue
sprang the greens and reds and yellows
into action: actual motion. I swear it’s true
though I’m not sure I ever took it in.
Now I’d be prepared, if some magician flew
into my field of vision, to realign
that dazzle out my window yet again.
It’s not likely, but I’m keeping my eyes open
though I still wouldn’t be able to explain
precisely what happened to these vines, these trees.
It isn’t available in my tradition.
For this, I would have to be Chinese,
Wang Wei, to be precise, on a mountain,
autumn rain converging on the trees,
a cassia flower nearby, a cloud, a pine,
washerwomen heading home for the day,
my senses and the mountain so entirely in tune
that when my stroke of blue arrives, I’m ready.
Though there is no rain here: the air’s shot through
with gold on golden leaves. Wang Wei’s so giddy
he’s calling back the dead: Li Bai! Du Fu!
Guys! You’ve got to see this—autumn sun!
~~~
Because you’re gone, I take a book to bed:The Flame of Passion. Scabbard at his thigh,
Lord Henry gets the girl. You’d only buy
top Booklist picks. “The romance genre’s dead,”
you’d say when promises of I-thee-wed
lured me to bargain bins. I learned to lie
about my day, hoard Harlequins on the sly
while you were off at work, your office spread
with red-inked proofs. But now it makes me yawn
to read beyond the lovers’ wedding night.
I close The Flame, not even halfway through.
His sword grows dull while she goes on and on
about how lovers must stay true. I’d write
another ending, if I could, for you.
~~~
I
I can hear little clicks inside my dream.
Night drips its silver tap
down the back.
At 4 A.M. I wake. Thinking
of the man who
left in September.
His name was Law.
My face in the bathroom mirror
has white streaks down it.
I rinse the face and return to bed.
Tomorrow I am going to visit my mother.
SHE
She lives on a moor in the north.
She lives alone.
Spring opens like a blade there.
I travel all day on trains and bring a lot of books—
some for my mother, some for me
including The Collected Works Of Emily Brontë.
This is my favourite author.
Also my main fear, which I mean to confront.
Whenever I visit my mother
I feel I am turning into Emily Brontë,
my lonely life around me like a moor,
my ungainly body stumping over the mud flats with a look of transformation
that dies when I come in the kitchen door.
What meat is it, Emily, we need?
THREE
Three silent women at the kitchen table.
My mother’s kitchen is dark and small but out the window
there is the moor, paralyzed with ice.
It extends as far as the eye can see
over flat miles to a solid unlit white sky.
Mother and I are chewing lettuce carefully.
The kitchen wall clock emits a ragged low buzz that jumps
once a minute over the twelve.
I have Emily p. 216 propped open on the sugarbowl
but am covertly watching my mother.
A thousand questions hit my eyes from the inside.
My mother is studying her lettuce.
I turn to p. 217.
“In my flight through the kitchen I knocked over Hareton
who was hanging a litter of puppies
from a chairback in the doorway. . . .”
It is as if we have all been lowered into an atmosphere of glass.
Now and then a remark trails through the glass.
Taxes on the back lot. Not a good melon,
too early for melons.
Hairdresser in town found God, closes shop every Tuesday.
Mice in the teatowel drawer again.
Little pellets. Chew off
the corners of the napkins, if they knew
what paper napkins cost nowadays.
Rain tonight.
Rain tomorrow.
That volcano in the Philippines at it again. What’s her name
Anderson died no not Shirley
the opera singer. Negress.
Cancer.
Not eating your garnish, you don’t like pimento?
Out the window I can see dead leaves ticking over the flatland
and dregs of snow scarred by pine filth.
At the middle of the moor
where the ground goes down into a depression,
the ice has begun to unclench.
Black open water comes
curdling up like anger. My mother speaks suddenly.
That psychotherapy’s not doing you much good is it?
You aren’t getting over him.
My mother has a way of summing things up.
She never liked Law much
but she liked the idea of me having a man and getting on with life.
Well he’s a taker and you’re a giver I hope it works out,
was all she said after she met him.
Give and take were just words to me
at the time. I had not been in love before.
It was like a wheel rolling downhill.
But early this morning while mother slept
and I was downstairs reading the part in Wuthering Heights
where Heathcliff clings at the lattice in the storm sobbing
Come in! Come in! to the ghost of his heart’s darling,
I fell on my knees on the rug and sobbed too.
She knows how to hang puppies,
that Emily.
It isn’t like taking an aspirin you know, I answer feebly.
Dr. Haw says grief is a long process.
She frowns. What does it accomplish
all that raking up the past?
Oh—I spread my hands—
I prevail! I look her in the eye.
She grins. Yes you do.
WHACHER
Whacher,
Emily’s habitual spelling of this word,
has caused confusion.
For example
in the first line of the poem printed Tell me, whether, is it winter?
in the Shakespeare Head edition.
But whacher is what she wrote.
Whacher is what she was.
She whached God and humans and moor wind and open night.
She whached eyes, stars, inside, outside, actual weather.
She whached the bars of time, which broke.
She whached the poor core of the world,
wide open.
To be a whacher is not a choice.
There is nowhere to get away from it,
no ledge to climb up to—like a swimmer
who walks out of the water at sunset
shaking the drops off, it just flies open.
To be a whacher is not in itself sad or happy,
although she uses these words in her verse
as she uses the emotions of sexual union in her novel,
grazing with euphemism the work of whaching.
But it has no name.
It is transparent.
Sometimes she calls it Thou.
“Emily is in the parlour brushing the carpet,”
records Charlotte in 1828.
Unsociable even at home
and unable to meet the eyes of strangers when she ventured out,
Emily made her awkward way
across days and years whose bareness appalls her biographers.
This sad stunted life, says one.
Uninteresting, unremarkable, wracked by disappointment
and despair, says another.
She could have been a great navigator if she’d been male,
suggests a third. Meanwhile
Emily continued to brush into the carpet the question,
Why cast the world away.
For someone hooked up to Thou,
the world may have seemed a kind of half-finished sentence.
But in between the neighbour who recalls her
coming in from a walk on the moors
with her face “lit up by a divine light”
and the sister who tells us
Emily never made a friend in her life,
is a space where the little raw soul
slips through.
It goes skimming the deep keel like a storm petrel,
out of sight.
The little raw soul was caught by no one.
She didn’t have friends, children, sex, religion, marriage, success, a salary
or a fear of death. She worked
in total six months of her life (at a school in Halifax)
and died on the sofa at home at 2 P.M. on a winter afternoon
in her thirty-first year. She spent
most of the hours of her life brushing the carpet,
walking the moor
or whaching. She says
it gave her peace.
“All tight and right in which condition it is to be hoped we shall all be this   
    day 4 years,”
she wrote in her Diary Paper of 1837.
Yet her poetry from beginning to end is concerned with prisons,
vaults, cages, bars, curbs, bits, bolts, fetters,
locked windows, narrow frames, aching walls.
“Why all the fuss?” asks one critic.
“She wanted liberty. Well didn’t she have it?
A reasonably satisfactory homelife,
a most satisfactory dreamlife—why all this beating of wings?
What was this cage, invisible to us,
which she felt herself to be confined in?”
Well there are many ways of being held prisoner,
I am thinking as I stride over the moor.
As a rule after lunch mother has a nap
and I go out to walk.
The bare blue trees and bleached wooden sky of April
carve into me with knives of light.
Something inside it reminds me of childhood—
it is the light of the stalled time after lunch
when clocks tick
and hearts shut
and fathers leave to go back to work
and mothers stand at the kitchen sink pondering
something they never tell.
You remember too much,
my mother said to me recently.
Why hold onto all that? And I said,
Where can I put it down?
She shifted to a question about airports.
Crops of ice are changing to mud all around me
as I push on across the moor
warmed by drifts from the pale blue sun.
On the edge of the moor our pines
dip and coast in breezes
from somewhere else.
Perhaps the hardest thing about losing a lover is
to watch the year repeat its days.
It is as if I could dip my hand down
into time and scoop up
blue and green lozenges of April heat
a year ago in another country.
I can feel that other day running underneath this one
like an old videotape—here we go fast around the last corner
up the hill to his house, shadows
of limes and roses blowing in the car window
and music spraying from the radio and him
singing and touching my left hand to his lips.
Law lived in a high blue room from which he could see the sea.
Time in its transparent loops as it passes beneath me now
still carries the sound of the telephone in that room
and traffic far off and doves under the window
chuckling coolly and his voice saying,
You beauty. I can feel that beauty’s
heart beating inside mine as she presses into his arms in the high blue room—
No, I say aloud. I force my arms down
through air which is suddenly cold and heavy as water
and the videotape jerks to a halt
like a glass slide under a drop of blood.
I stop and turn and stand into the wind,
which now plunges towards me over the moor.
When Law left I felt so bad I thought I would die.
This is not uncommon.
I took up the practice of meditation.
Each morning I sat on the floor in front of my sofa
and chanted bits of old Latin prayers.De profundis clamavi ad te Domine.
Each morning a vision came to me.
Gradually I understood that these were naked glimpses of my soul.
I called them Nudes.
Nude #1. Woman alone on a hill.
She stands into the wind.
It is a hard wind slanting from the north.
Long flaps and shreds of flesh rip off the woman’s body and lift
and blow away on the wind, leaving
an exposed column of nerve and blood and muscle
calling mutely through lipless mouth.
It pains me to record this,
I am not a melodramatic person.
But soul is “hewn in a wild workshop”
as Charlotte Brontë says of Wuthering Heights.
Charlotte’s preface to Wuthering Heights is a publicist’s masterpiece.
Like someone carefully not looking at a scorpion
crouched on the arm of the sofa Charlotte
talks firmly and calmly
about the other furniture of Emily’s workshop—about
the inexorable spirit (“stronger than a man, simpler than a child”),
the cruel illness (“pain no words can render”),
the autonomous end (“she sank rapidly, she made haste to leave us”)
and about Emily’s total subjection
to a creative project she could neither understand nor control,
and for which she deserves no more praise nor blame
than if she had opened her mouth
“to breathe lightning.” The scorpion is inching down
the arm of the sofa while Charlotte
continues to speak helpfully about lightning
and other weather we may expect to experience
when we enter Emily’s electrical atmosphere.
It is “a horror of great darkness” that awaits us there
but Emily is not responsible. Emily was in the grip.
“Having formed these beings she did not know what she had done,”
says Charlotte (of Heathcliff and Earnshaw and Catherine).
Well there are many ways of being held prisoner.
The scorpion takes a light spring and lands on our left knee
as Charlotte concludes, “On herself she had no pity.”
Pitiless too are the Heights, which Emily called Wuthering
because of their “bracing ventilation”
and “a north wind over the edge.”
Whaching a north wind grind the moor
that surrounded her father’s house on every side,
formed of a kind of rock called millstone grit,
taught Emily all she knew about love and its necessities—
an angry education that shapes the way her characters
use one another. “My love for Heathcliff,” says Catherine,
“resembles the eternal rocks beneath
a source of little visible delight, but necessary.”
Necessary? I notice the sun has dimmed
and the afternoon air sharpening.
I turn and start to recross the moor towards home.
What are the imperatives
that hold people like Catherine and Heathcliff
together and apart, like pores blown into hot rock
and then stranded out of reach
of one another when it hardens? What kind of necessity is that?
The last time I saw Law was a black night in September.
Autumn had begun,
my knees were cold inside my clothes.
A chill fragment of moon rose.
He stood in my living room and spoke
without looking at me. Not enough spin on it,
he said of our five years of love.
Inside my chest I felt my heart snap into two pieces
which floated apart. By now I was so cold
it was like burning. I put out my hand
to touch his. He moved back.
I don’t want to be sexual with you, he said. Everything gets crazy.
But now he was looking at me.
Yes, I said as I began to remove my clothes.
Everything gets crazy. When nude
I turned my back because he likes the back.
He moved onto me.
Everything I know about love and its necessities
I learned in that one moment
when I found myself
thrusting my little burning red backside like a baboon
at a man who no longer cherished me.
There was no area of my mind
not appalled by this action, no part of my body
that could have done otherwise.
But to talk of mind and body begs the question.
Soul is the place,
stretched like a surface of millstone grit between body and mind,
where such necessity grinds itself out.
Soul is what I kept watch on all that night.
Law stayed with me.
We lay on top of the covers as if it weren’t really a night of sleep and time,
caressing and singing to one another in our made-up language
like the children we used to be.
That was a night that centred Heaven and Hell,
as Emily would say. We tried to fuck
but he remained limp, although happy. I came
again and again, each time accumulating lucidity,
until at last I was floating high up near the ceiling looking down
on the two souls clasped there on the bed
with their mortal boundaries
visible around them like lines on a map.
I saw the lines harden.
He left in the morning.
It is very cold
walking into the long scraped April wind.
At this time of year there is no sunset
just some movements inside the light and then a sinking away.
KITCHEN
Kitchen is quiet as a bone when I come in.
No sound from the rest of the house.
I wait a moment
then open the fridge.
Brilliant as a spaceship it exhales cold confusion.
My mother lives alone and eats little but her fridge is always crammed.
After extracting the yogurt container
from beneath a wily arrangement of leftover blocks of Christmas cake
wrapped in foil and prescription medicine bottles
I close the fridge door. Bluish dusk
fills the room like a sea slid back.
I lean against the sink.
White foods taste best to me
and I prefer to eat alone. I don’t know why.
Once I heard girls singing a May Day song that went:
                                 Violante in the pantry
                                 Gnawing at a mutton bone
                                 How she gnawed it
                                 How she clawed it
                                 When she felt herself alone.
Girls are cruelest to themselves.
Someone like Emily Brontë,
who remained a girl all her life despite her body as a woman,
had cruelty drifted up in all the cracks of her like spring snow.
We can see her ridding herself of it at various times
with a gesture like she used to brush the carpet.
Reason with him and then whip him!
was her instruction (age six) to her father
regarding brother Branwell.
And when she was 14 and bitten by a rabid dog she strode (they say)
into the kitchen and taking red hot tongs from the back of the stove applied
them directly to her arm.
Cauterization of Heathcliff took longer.
More than thirty years in the time of the novel,
from the April evening when he runs out the back door of the kitchen
and vanishes over the moor
because he overheard half a sentence of Catherine’s
(“It would degrade me to marry Heathcliff”)
until the wild morning
when the servant finds him stark dead and grinning
on his rainsoaked bed upstairs in Wuthering Heights.
Heathcliff is a pain devil.
If he had stayed in the kitchen
long enough to hear the other half of Catherine’s sentence
(“so he will never know how I love him”)
Heathcliff would have been set free.
But Emily knew how to catch a devil.
She put into him in place of a soul
the constant cold departure of Catherine from his nervous system
every time he drew a breath or moved thought.
She broke all his moments in half,
with the kitchen door standing open.
I am not unfamiliar with this half-life.
But there is more to it than that.
Heathcliff’s sexual despair
arose out of no such experience in the life of Emily Brontë,
so far as we know. Her question,
which concerns the years of inner cruelty that can twist a person into a pain
    devil,
came to her in a kindly firelit kitchen
(“kichin” in Emily’s spelling) where she
and Charlotte and Anne peeled potatoes together
and made up stories with the old house dog Keeper at their feet.
There is a fragment
of a poem she wrote in 1839
(about six years before Wuthering Heights) that says:
                            That iron man was born like me
                            And he was once an ardent boy:
                            He must have felt in infancy
                            The glory of a summer sky.
Who is the iron man?
My mother’s voice cuts across me,
from the next room where she is lying on the sofa.
Is that you dear?
Yes Ma.
Why don’t you turn on a light in there?
Out the kitchen window I watch the steely April sun
jab its last cold yellow streaks
across a dirty silver sky.
Okay Ma. What’s for supper?
LIBERTY
Liberty means different things to different people.
I have never liked lying in bed in the morning.
Law did.
My mother does.
But as soon as the morning light hits my eyes I want to be out in it—
moving along the moor
into the first blue currents and cold navigation of everything awake.
I hear my mother in the next room turn and sigh and sink deeper.
I peel the stale cage of sheets off my legs
and I am free.
Out on the moor all is brilliant and hard after a night of frost.
The light plunges straight up from the ice to a blue hole at the top of the sky.
Frozen mud crunches underfoot. The sound
startles me back into the dream I was having
this morning when I awoke,
one of those nightlong sweet dreams of lying in Law’s
arms like a needle in water—it is a physical effort
to pull myself out of his white silk hands
as they slide down my dream hips—I
turn and face into the wind
and begin to run.
Goblins, devils and death stream behind me.
In the days and months after Law left
I felt as if the sky was torn off my life.
I had no home in goodness anymore.
To see the love between Law and me
turn into two animals gnawing and craving through one another
towards some other hunger was terrible.
Perhaps this is what people mean by original sin, I thought.
But what love could be prior to it?
What is prior?
What is love?
My questions were not original.
Nor did I answer them.
Mornings when I meditated
I was presented with a nude glimpse of my lone soul,
not the complex mysteries of love and hate.
But the Nudes are still as clear in my mind
as pieces of laundry that froze on the clothesline overnight.
There were in all thirteen of them.
Nude #2. Woman caught in a cage of thorns.
Big glistening brown thorns with black stains on them
where she twists this way and that way
unable to stand upright.
Nude #3. Woman with a single great thorn implanted in her forehead.
She grips it in both hands
endeavouring to wrench it out.
Nude #4. Woman on a blasted landscape
backlit in red like Hieronymus Bosch.
Covering her head and upper body is a hellish contraption
like the top half of a crab.
With arms crossed as if pulling off a sweater
she works hard at dislodging the crab.
It was about this time
I began telling Dr. Haw
about the Nudes. She said,
When you see these horrible images why do you stay with them?
Why keep watching? Why not
go away? I was amazed.
Go away where? I said.
This still seems to me a good question.
But by now the day is wide open and a strange young April light
is filling the moor with gold milk.
I have reached the middle
where the ground goes down into a depression and fills with swampy water.
It is frozen.
A solid black pane of moor life caught in its own night attitudes.
Certain wild gold arrangements of weed are visible deep in the black.
Four naked alder trunks rise straight up from it
and sway in the blue air. Each trunk
where it enters the ice radiates a map of silver pressures—
thousands of hair-thin cracks catching the white of the light
like a jailed face
catching grins through the bars.
Emily Brontë has a poem about a woman in jail who says
                A messenger of Hope, comes every night to me
                And offers, for short life, eternal Liberty.
I wonder what kind of Liberty this is.
Her critics and commentators say she means death
or a visionary experience that prefigures death.
They understand her prison
as the limitations placed on a clergyman’s daughter
by nineteenth-century life in a remote parish on a cold moor
in the north of England.
They grow impatient with the extreme terms in which she figures prison life.
“In so much of Brontë’s work
the self-dramatising and posturing of these poems teeters
on the brink of a potentially bathetic melodrama,”
says one. Another
refers to “the cardboard sublime” of her caught world.
I stopped telling my psychotherapist about the Nudes
when I realized I had no way to answer her question,
Why keep watching?
Some people watch, that’s all I can say.
There is nowhere else to go,
no ledge to climb up to.
Perhaps I can explain this to her if I wait for the right moment,
as with a very difficult sister.
“On that mind time and experience alone could work:
to the influence of other intellects it was not amenable,”
wrote Charlotte of Emily.
I wonder what kind of conversation these two had
over breakfast at the parsonage.
“My sister Emily
was not a person of demonstrative character,” Charlotte emphasizes,
“nor one on the recesses of whose mind and feelings,
even those nearest and dearest to her could,
with impunity, intrude unlicensed. . . .” Recesses were many.
One autumn day in 1845 Charlotte
“accidentally lighted on a MS. volume of verse in my sister Emily’s   
    handwriting.”
It was a small (4 x 6) notebook
with a dark red cover marked 6d.
and contained 44 poems in Emily’s minute hand.
Charlotte had known Emily wrote verse
but felt “more than surprise” at its quality.
“Not at all like the poetry women generally write.”
Further surprise awaited Charlotte when she read Emily’s novel,
not least for its foul language.
She gently probes this recess
in her Editor’s Preface to Wuthering Heights.
“A large class of readers, likewise, will suffer greatly
from the introduction into the pages of this work
of words printed with all their letters,
which it has become the custom to represent by the initial and final letter
    only—a blank
line filling the interval.”
Well, there are different definitions of Liberty.
Love is freedom, Law was fond of saying.
I took this to be more a wish than a thought
and changed the subject.
But blank lines do not say nothing.
As Charlotte puts it,
“The practice of hinting by single letters those expletives
with which profane and violent persons are wont to garnish their discourse,
strikes me as a proceeding which,
however well meant, is weak and futile.
I cannot tell what good it does—what feeling it spares—
what horror it conceals.”
I turn my steps and begin walking back over the moor
towards home and breakfast. It is a two-way traffic,
the language of the unsaid. My favourite pages
of The Collected Works Of Emily Brontë
are the notes at the back
recording small adjustments made by Charlotte
to the text of Emily’s verse,
which Charlotte edited for publication after Emily’s death.
“Prison for strongest [in Emily’s hand] altered to lordly by Charlotte.”
HERO
I can tell by the way my mother chews her toast
whether she had a good night
and is about to say a happy thing
or not.
Not.
She puts her toast down on the side of her plate.
You know you can pull the drapes in that room, she begins.
This is a coded reference to one of our oldest arguments,
from what I call The Rules Of Life series.
My mother always closes her bedroom drapes tight before going to bed at night.
I open mine as wide as possible.
I like to see everything, I say.
What’s there to see?
Moon. Air. Sunrise.
All that light on your face in the morning. Wakes you up.
I like to wake up.
At this point the drapes argument has reached a delta
and may advance along one of three channels.
There is the What You Need Is A Good Night’s Sleep channel,
the Stubborn As Your Father channel
and random channel.
More toast? I interpose strongly, pushing back my chair.
Those women! says my mother with an exasperated rasp.
Mother has chosen random channel.
Women?
Complaining about rape all the time
I see she is tapping one furious finger on yesterday’s newspaper
lying beside the grape jam.
The front page has a small feature
about a rally for International Women’s Day—
have you had a look at the Sears Summer Catalogue?
Nope.
Why, it’s a disgrace! Those bathing suits—
cut way up to here! (she points) No wonder!
You’re saying women deserve to get raped
because Sears bathing suit ads
have high-cut legs? Ma, are you serious?
Well someone has to be responsible.
Why should women be responsible for male desire? My voice is high.
Oh I see you’re one of Them.
One of Whom? My voice is very high. Mother vaults it.
And whatever did you do with that little tank suit you had last year the green
    one?
It looked so smart on you.
The frail fact drops on me from a great height
that my mother is afraid.
She will be eighty years old this summer.
Her tiny sharp shoulders hunched in the blue bathrobe
make me think of Emily Brontë’s little merlin hawk Hero
that she fed bits of bacon at the kitchen table when Charlotte wasn‘t around.
So Ma, we’ll go—I pop up the toaster
and toss a hot slice of pumpernickel lightly across onto her plate—
visit Dad today? She eyes the kitchen clock with hostility.
Leave at eleven, home again by four? I continue.
She is buttering her toast with jagged strokes.
Silence is assent in our code. I go into the next room to phone the taxi.
My father lives in a hospital for patients who need chronic care
about 50 miles from here.
He suffers from a kind of dementia
characterized by two sorts of pathological change
first recorded in 1907 by Alois Alzheimer.
First, the presence in cerebral tissue
of a spherical formation known as neuritic plaque,
consisting mainly of degenerating brain cells.
Second, neurofibrillary snarlings
in the cerebral cortex and in the hippocampus.
There is no known cause or cure.
Mother visits him by taxi once a week
for the last five years.
Marriage is for better or for worse, she says,
this is the worse.
So about an hour later we are in the taxi
shooting along empty country roads towards town.
The April light is clear as an alarm.
As we pass them it gives a sudden sense of every object
existing in space on its own shadow.
I wish I could carry this clarity with me
into the hospital where distinctions tend to flatten and coalesce.
I wish I had been nicer to him before he got crazy.
These are my two wishes.
It is hard to find the beginning of dementia.
I remember a night about ten years ago
when I was talking to him on the telephone.
It was a Sunday night in winter.
I heard his sentences filling up with fear.
He would start a sentence—about weather, lose his way, start another.
It made me furious to hear him floundering—
my tall proud father, former World War II navigator!
It made me merciless.
I stood on the edge of the conversation,
watching him thrash about for cues,
offering none,
and it came to me like a slow avalanche
that he had no idea who he was talking to.
Much colder today I guess. . . .
his voice pressed into the silence and broke off,
snow falling on it.
There was a long pause while snow covered us both.
Well I won’t keep you,
he said with sudden desperate cheer as if sighting land.
I’ll say goodnight now,
I won’t run up your bill. Goodbye.
Goodbye.
Goodbye. Who are you?
I said into the dial tone.
At the hospital we pass down long pink halls
through a door with a big window
and a combination lock (5—25—3)
to the west wing, for chronic care patients.
Each wing has a name.
The chronic wing is Our Golden Mile
although mother prefers to call it The Last Lap.
Father sits strapped in a chair which is tied to the wall
in a room of other tied people tilting at various angles.
My father tilts least, I am proud of him.
Hi Dad how y’doing?
His face cracks open it could be a grin or rage
and looking past me he issues a stream of vehemence at the air.
My mother lays her hand on his.
Hello love, she says. He jerks his hand away. We sit.
Sunlight flocks through the room.
Mother begins to unpack from her handbag the things she has brought for him,
grapes, arrowroot biscuits, humbugs.
He is addressing strenuous remarks to someone in the air between us.
He uses a language known only to himself,
made of snarls and syllables and sudden wild appeals.
Once in a while some old formula floats up through the wash—
You don’t say! or Happy birthday to you!—
but no real sentence
for more than three years now.
I notice his front teeth are getting black.
I wonder how you clean the teeth of mad people.
He always took good care of his teeth. My mother looks up.
She and I often think two halves of one thought.
Do you remember that gold-plated toothpick
you sent him from Harrod’s the summer you were in London? she asks.
Yes I wonder what happened to it.
Must be in the bathroom somewhere.
She is giving him grapes one by one.
They keep rolling out of his huge stiff fingers.
He used to be a big man, over six feet tall and strong,
but since he came to hospital his body has shrunk to the merest bone house—
except the hands. The hands keep growing.
Each one now as big as a boot in Van Gogh,
they go lumbering after the grapes in his lap.
But now he turns to me with a rush of urgent syllables
that break off on a high note—he waits,
staring into my face. That quizzical look.
One eyebrow at an angle.
I have a photograph taped to my fridge at home.
It shows his World War II air crew posing in front of the plane.
Hands firmly behind backs, legs wide apart,
chins forward.
Dressed in the puffed flying suits
with a wide leather strap pulled tight through the crotch.
They squint into the brilliant winter sun of 1942.
It is dawn.
They are leaving Dover for France.
My father on the far left is the tallest airman,
with his collar up,
one eyebrow at an angle.
The shadowless light makes him look immortal,
for all the world like someone who will not weep again.
He is still staring into my face.
Flaps down! I cry.
His black grin flares once and goes out like a match.
HOT
Hot blue moonlight down the steep sky.
I wake too fast from a cellar of hanged puppies
with my eyes pouring into the dark.
Fumbling
and slowly
consciousness replaces the bars.
Dreamtails and angry liquids
swim back down to the middle of me.
It is generally anger dreams that occupy my nights now.
This is not uncommon after loss of love—
blue and black and red blasting the crater open.
I am interested in anger.
I clamber along to find the source.
My dream was of an old woman lying awake in bed.
She controls the house by a system of light bulbs strung above her on wires.
Each wire has a little black switch.
One by one the switches refuse to turn the bulbs on.
She keeps switching and switching
in rising tides of very hot anger.
Then she creeps out of bed to peer through lattices
at the rooms of the rest of the house.
The rooms are silent and brilliantly lit
and full of huge furniture beneath which crouch
small creatures—not quite cats not quite rats
licking their narrow red jaws
under a load of time.
I want to be beautiful again, she whispers
but the great overlit rooms tick emptily
as a deserted oceanliner and now behind her in the dark
a rustling sound, comes—
My pajamas are soaked.
Anger travels through me, pushes aside everything else in my heart,
pouring up the vents.
Every night I wake to this anger,
the soaked bed,
the hot pain box slamming me each way I move.
I want justice. Slam.
I want an explanation. Slam.
I want to curse the false friend who said I love you forever. Slam.
I reach up and switch on the bedside lamp. Night springs
out the window and is gone over the moor.
I lie listening to the light vibrate in my ears
and thinking about curses.
Emily Brontë was good at cursing.
Falsity and bad love and the deadly pain of alteration are constant topics in
    her verse.
                     Well, thou halt paid me back my love!
                     But if there be a God above
                     Whose arm is strong, whose word is true,
                     This hell shall wring thy spirit too!
The curses are elaborate:
            There go, Deceiver, go! My hand is streaming wet;
            My heart’s blood flows to buy the blessing—To forget!
            Oh could that lost heart give back, back again to thine,
            One tenth part of the pain that clouds my dark decline!
But they do not bring her peace:
       Vain words, vain frenzied thoughts! No ear can hear me call—
       Lost in the vacant air my frantic curses fall. . . .
       Unconquered in my soul the Tyrant rules me still—
       Life bows to my control, but Love I cannot kill!
Her anger is a puzzle.
It raises many questions in me,
to see love treated with such cold and knowing contempt
by someone who rarely left home
“except to go to church or take a walk on the hills”
(Charlotte tells us) and who
had no more intercourse with Haworth folk
than “a nun has
of the country people who sometimes pass her convent gates.”
How did Emily come to lose faith in humans?
She admired their dialects, studied their genealogies,
“but with them she rarely exchanged a word.”
Her introvert nature shrank from shaking hands with someone she met on the moor.
What did Emily know of lover’s lies or cursive human faith?
Among her biographers
is one who conjectures she bore or aborted a child
during her six-month stay in Halifax,
but there is no evidence at all for such an event
and the more general consensus is that Emily did not touch a man in her 31
    years.
Banal sexism aside,
I find myself tempted
to read Wuthering Heights as one thick stacked act of revenge
for all that life withheld from Emily.
But the poetry shows traces of a deeper explanation.
As if anger could be a kind of vocation for some women.
It is a chilly thought.
                           
                              The heart is dead since infancy.
                              Unwept for let the body go.
Suddenly cold I reach down and pull the blanket back up to my chin.
The vocation of anger is not mine.
I know my source.
It is stunning, it is a moment like no other,
when one’s lover comes in and says I do not love you anymore.
I switch off the lamp and lie on my back,
thinking about Emily’s cold young soul.
Where does unbelief begin?
When I was young
there were degrees of certainty.
I could say, Yes I know that I have two hands.
Then one day I awakened on a planet of people whose hands occasionally   
    disappear—
From the next room I hear my mother shift and sigh and settle
back down under the doorsill of sleep.
Out the window the moon is just a cold bit of silver gristle low on fading banks
    of sky.
          Our guests are darkly lodged, I whispered, gazing through
          The vault . . .
THOU
The question I am left with is the question of her loneliness.
And I prefer to put it off.
It is morning.
Astonished light is washing over the moor from north to east.
I am walking into the light.
One way to put off loneliness is to interpose God.
Emily had a relationship on this level with someone she calls Thou. She describes Thou as awake like herself all night
and full of strange power.
Thou woos Emily with a voice that comes out of the night wind.
Thou and Emily influence one another in the darkness,
playing near and far at once.
She talks about a sweetness that “proved us one.”
I am uneasy with the compensatory model of female religious experience and yet,
there is no question,
it would be sweet to have a friend to tell things to at night,
without the terrible sex price to pay.
This is a childish idea, I know.
My education, I have to admit, has been gappy.
The basic rules of male-female relations
were imparted atmospherically in our family,
no direct speech allowed.
I remember one Sunday I was sitting in the backseat of the car.
Father in front.
We were waiting in the driveway for mother,
who came around the corner of the house
and got into the passenger side of the car
dressed in a yellow Chanel suit and black high heels.
Father glanced sideways at her.
Showing a good bit of leg today Mother, he said
in a voice which I (age eleven) thought odd.
I stared at the back of her head waiting for what she would say.
Her answer would clear this up.
But she just laughed a strange laugh with ropes all over it.
Later that summer I put this laugh together with another laugh
I overheard as I was going upstairs.
She was talking on the telephone in the kitchen.
Well a woman would be just as happy with a kiss on the cheek
most of the time but YOU KNOW MEN,
she was saying. Laugh.
Not ropes, thorns.
I have arrived at the middle of the moor
where the ground goes down into a low swampy place.
The swamp water is frozen solid.
Bits of gold weed
have etched themselves
on the underside of the ice like messages.
                        I’ll come when thou art saddest,
                        Laid alone in the darkened room;
                        When the mad day’s mirth has vanished,
                        And the smile of joy is banished,
                         I’ll come when the heart’s real feeling
                         Has entire, unbiased sway,
                         And my influence o’er thee stealing
                         Grief deepening, joy congealing,
                         Shall bear thy soul away.
                         Listen! ’tis just the hour,
                         The awful time for thee:
                         Dost thou not feel upon thy soul
                         A flood of strange sensations roll,
                         Forerunners of a sterner power,
                         Heralds of me?
Very hard to read, the messages that pass
between Thou and Emily.
In this poem she reverses their roles,
speaking not as the victim but to the victim.
It is chilling to watch Thou move upon thou,
who lies alone in the dark waiting to be mastered.
It is a shock to realize that this low, slow collusion
of master and victim within one voice
is a rationale
for the most awful loneliness of the poet’s hour.
She has reversed the roles of thou and Thou
not as a display of power
but to force out of herself some pity
for this soul trapped in glass,
which is her true creation.
Those nights lying alone
are not discontinuous with this cold hectic dawn.
It is who I am.
Is it a vocation of anger?
Why construe silence
as the Real Presence?
Why stoop to kiss this doorstep?
Why be unstrung and pounded flat and pine away
imagining someone vast to whom I may vent the swell of my soul?
Emily was fond of Psalm 130.
“My soul waiteth on Thou more than they that watch for the morning,
I say more than they that watch for the morning.”
I like to believe that for her the act of watching provided a shelter,
that her collusion with Thou gave ease to anger and desire:
”In Thou they are quenched as a fire of thorns,“ says the psalmist.
But for myself I do not believe this, I am not quenched—
with Thou or without Thou I find no shelter.
I am my own Nude.
And Nudes have a difficult sexual destiny.
I have watched this destiny disclose itself
in its jerky passage from girl to woman to who I am now,
from love to anger to this cold marrow,
from fire to shelter to fire.
What is the opposite of believing in Thou—
merely not believing in Thou? No. That is too simple.
That is to prepare a misunderstanding.
I want to speak more clearly.
Perhaps the Nudes are the best way.
Nude #5. Deck of cards.
Each card is made of flesh.
The living cards are days of a woman’s life.
I see a great silver needle go flashing right through the deck once from end to
    end.
Nude #6 I cannot remember.
Nude #7. White room whose walls,
having neither planes nor curves nor angles,
are composed of a continuous satiny white membrane
like the flesh of some interior organ of the moon.
It is a living surface, almost wet.
Lucency breathes in and out.
Rainbows shudder across it.
And around the walls of the room a voice goes whispering,Be very careful. Be very careful.
Nude #8. Black disc on which the fires of all the winds
are attached in a row.
A woman stands on the disc
amid the winds whose long yellow silk flames
flow and vibrate up through her.
Nude #9. Transparent loam.
Under the loam a woman has dug a long deep trench.
Into the trench she is placing small white forms, I don’t know what they are.
Nude #10. Green thorn of the world poking up
alive through the heart of a woman
who lies on her back on the ground.
The thorn is exploding
its green blood above her in the air.Everything it is it has, the voice says.
Nude #11. Ledge in outer space.
Space is bluish black and glossy as solid water
and moving very fast in all directions,
shrieking past the woman who stands pinned
to nothing by its pressure.
She peers and glances for some way to go, trying to lift her hand but cannot.
Nude #12. Old pole in the wind.
Cold currents are streaming over it
and pulling out
into ragged long horizontal black lines
some shreds of ribbon
attached to the pole.
I cannot see how they are attached—
notches? staples? nails? All of a sudden the wind changes
and all the black shreds rise straight up in the air
and tie themselves into knots,
then untie and float down.
The wind is gone.
It waits.
By this time, midway through winter,
I had become entirely fascinated with my spiritual melodrama.
Then it stopped.
Days passed, months passed and I saw nothing.
I continued to peer and glance, sitting on the rug in front of my sofa
in the curtainless morning
with my nerves open to the air like something skinned.
I saw nothing.
Outside the window spring storms came and went.
April snow folded its huge white paws over doors and porches.
I watched a chunk of it lean over the roof and break off
and fall and I thought,
How slow! as it glided soundlessly past,
but still—nothing. No nudes.
No Thou.
A great icicle formed on the railing of my balcony
so I drew up close to the window and tried peering through the icicle,
hoping to trick myself into some interior vision,
but all I saw
was the man and woman in the room across the street
making their bed and laughing.
I stopped watching.
I forgot about Nudes.
I lived my life,
which felt like a switched-off TV.
Something had gone through me and out and I could not own it.
“No need now to tremble for the hard frost and the keen wind.
Emily does not feel them,”
wrote Charlotte the day after burying her sister.
Emily had shaken free.
A soul can do that.
Whether it goes to join Thou and sit on the porch for all eternity
enjoying jokes and kisses and beautiful cold spring evenings,
you and I will never know. But I can tell you what I saw.
Nude #13 arrived when I was not watching for it.
It came at night.
Very much like Nude #1.
And yet utterly different.
I saw a high hill and on it a form shaped against hard air.
It could have been just a pole with some old cloth attached,
but as I came closer
I saw it was a human body
trying to stand against winds so terrible that the flesh was blowing off the bones.
And there was no pain.
The wind
was cleansing the bones.
They stood forth silver and necessary.
It was not my body, not a woman’s body, it was the body of us all.
It walked out of the light.
 
~~~
1
Who knew it’﻿﻿﻿s quite all right that I downed three
gin-and-tonics (can’﻿﻿﻿t fit male inside
female part on fanny pack) at four
o’﻿﻿﻿clock the Dyke March day of NY Pride?
Who knew Manhattan streets would liquefy
and lurch with dames sans bras, sans hair, sans shirt
in step with beer-can band led by a skirt-
ed trans in green brassiere, led by the cops
whose sentries are staid as posts with glasses on,
lined up beside the march like S/M tops?
(They seem to think Gay Pride’﻿﻿﻿s this weekend’﻿﻿﻿s yawn.)
(Pit stop at McD’﻿﻿﻿s, can’﻿﻿﻿t clip pack back on.)
Who knew she’﻿﻿﻿d march beside me hand-in-hand
and who’﻿﻿﻿d expect me to remember names
when Liz’﻿﻿﻿s girlfriend saw us and waved “Hi.
It’﻿﻿﻿s . . . Anna”? (CNN shot feed, then frames.)
Booze-stymied by the glare of girls and sky,
how could I choose? Should I grip hand, or pray
wondering: Is today today the day
she’﻿﻿﻿ll let me turn the key, lead her inside?
 
     2
Okay, I’﻿﻿﻿m sober now. Today is just
the kind of day she talks but feels no lust.
 
     3
Beside her isn’﻿﻿﻿t bad. Fan-stirred, the air
is humid and the theater is packed.
An ear-cuffed thespian tries to fix the cold,
our leading ladies sweat it out in back.
A prim man to my right begins to sneeze.
My nose is in agreement. The perfume
from Queen Mother there could clear the room.
This shadow play across her face is fine.
Her arm’﻿﻿﻿s near mine, which means exactly nothing.
Hope’﻿﻿﻿s hope hums on through separate listening.
That skull, opaque to me as Midland’﻿﻿﻿s vault,
her silky crop, its pepper dabbed with salt —
I chuckle at an apt sardonic line.
Her suede complexion, lifts up, checks the time.
 
     4. Les Nouvceaux from La Nouvelle Justine
I don’﻿﻿﻿t love her. She doesn’﻿﻿﻿t love me. Neither
does this waiter who may think it strange
when young girls dine with staid dames twice their age
on salade de Bastille and pain de Sade.
I don’﻿﻿﻿t like sitting by her like wet cloth.
I don’﻿﻿﻿t like restaurants whose queers pawn sex
to the bachelor bunch who want a thrill.
I don’﻿﻿﻿t like dining with my, well, not-ex,
both measuring the humid air for signs
of sparks I see by parts will not ignite.
I’﻿﻿﻿d rather have a knock-down, drag-out fight
that cleared the joint than watch another guy
get spanked by Corset Kris, who’﻿﻿﻿d like to grab
a tit, not spend hip humping hairy thighs.
I’﻿﻿﻿d rather I were twice her age and wise.
I’﻿﻿﻿d spin cruel stories of past day of bliss
then give my own hands covert exercise
and send her home to bed without a kiss.
 
     5. L’﻿﻿﻿Addition
 
30 for the play and 10 for gins,
10 for two cabs and 40 for the eats,
at least the metro home was freezer-cold,
at least the Broadway Local still had seats
at 96th, the local went express.
I blistered home ten sockless humid blocks
back to my solo digs for solo sex.
I got this poem for my 90 bucks.
~~~
I have been one acquainted with the spatula, the slotted, scuffed, Teflon-coated spatula that lifts a solitary hamburger from pan to plate, acquainted with the vibrator known as the Pocket Rocket and the dildo that goes by Tex,   and I have gone out, a drunken bitch, in order to ruin   what love I was given,   and also I have measured out   my life in little pills—Zoloft, Restoril, Celexa,   Xanax.   I have. For I am a poet. And it is my job, my duty to know wherein lies the beauty of this degraded body, or maybe   it's the degradation in the beautiful body,   the ugly me groping back to my desk to piss on perfection, to lay my kiss of mortal confusion   upon the mouth of infinite wisdom. My kiss says razors and pain, my kiss says   America is charged with the madness   of God. Sundays, too, the soldiers get up early, and put on their fatigues in the blue- black day. Black milk. Black gold. Texas tea. Into the valley of Halliburton rides the infantry— Why does one month have to be the cruelest, can't they all be equally cruel? I have seen the best gamers of your generation, joysticking their M1 tanks through the sewage-filled streets. Whose world this is I think I know.
~~~
It was Jessica Grim the American poet
who first advised me to read Violette Leduc.
Lurid conditions are facts. This is no different
from the daily protests and cashbars.
I now unknowingly speed towards
which of all acts, words, conditions —
I am troubled that I do not know.
When I feel depressed in broad daylight
depressed by the disappearance of names, the pollen
smearing the windowsill, I picture
the bending pages of La Bâtarde
and I think of wind. The outspread world is
comparable to a large theatre
or to rending paper, and the noise it makes when it flaps
is riotous. Clothes swish through the air, rubbing
my ears. Promptly I am quenched. I’m talking
about a cheap paperback which fans and
slips to the floor with a shush. Skirt stretched
taut between new knees, head turned back, I
hold down a branch,
~~~
Tennessee: We are here, between trees, with the tempo of a rosary being strungin a queue of escalating beads—Carolina: It’s not quite the count inthe countinghouse of my chestbut the heart does make an awful attemptt: and a circle wherever it may be there was music coming onc: which though machinery-like moves not in cogs, and neversprings, but waves throught: like wired applause for antic backstagebuds on the pre-comeuppance buzz; but it fadesc: but only after the chorus has pulsedt: it drops off with sudden decision, like fountainwater gone drossc: or it reaches the furthest pointthe branch turns from us, and is for some arc fully quiet...t: until the roulette snaps its jaw and the choir’scircuit opens to onec: like a pigeon unhinged, its wingsin sudden white-rumped ascentt: unopposed by iridescencec: unopposed by iridescence
~~~
We must not look for poetry in poems.                  —Donald Revell



You must not skirt the issue wearing skirts.You must not duck the bullet using ducks. You must not face the music with your face.Headbutting, don’t use your head. Or your butt.You must not use a house to build a home,and never look for poetry in poems.In fact, inject giraffes into your poems.Let loose the circus monkeys in their skirts.Explain the nest of wood is not a homeat all, but a blind for shooting wild ducks.Grab the shotgun by its metrical butt;aim at your Muse’s quacking, Pringled face.It’s good we’re talking like this, face to face.There should be more headbutting over poems.Citing an 80s brand has its cost buthonors the teenage me, always in skirts,showing my sister how to Be the Duckwith a potato-chip beak. Take me home,Mr. Revell. Or make yourself at homein my postbellum, Reconstruction face—my gray eyes, my rebel ears, all my ducksin the row of a defeated mouth. Poemswere once civil. But war has torn my skirtsoff at the first ruffle, baring my butt
~~~
Each day the job gets up

And rubs its eyes

 

We are going to live on in dry amazement

 

Workers push the granite bed under the avenue

 

Bed of the married

The re-          the pre-married

 

Making a form as forms become infinite

 

The scrapings       scraping

 

Graywhacke    chert

 

People wait for their bumpy little pizzas

Theories of theories in gravity voices

 

Melpomene goddess of tragedy bathes

 

Mostly the bride never the bridesmaid

 

Angel food in whole foods

 

Consider Tanguy whose lunar responses to childhood

Made everything a horizon

 

Those walking upside down don’t know what to think

 

The finch engineering itself to deep spring

 

Or you        life       tired of being cured

 

How many layers

Of giving up are there

 

One of it

 

Two of everything in the arc you save
~~~
The night is darkening round me,The wild winds coldly blow;But a tyrant spell has bound me,And I cannot, cannot go.The giant trees are bendingTheir bare boughs weighed with snow;The storm is fast descending,And yet I cannot go.Clouds beyond clouds above me,Wastes beyond wastes below;But nothing drear can move me;I will not, cannot go.
~~~
1 It opens as a long lamplit evening with Rembrandt, stretched out with the glossy book of his Works on Paper. Brown-petal etchings and drawings: nut-brown, browner, irreclaimable rills of iron-gall ink sucked and feathered into the paper's wan cusps and culverts. The ink...it's as if there's no pulling away from the wet, flowing line to the tiny hedge-village perched on the edge of the cliff and the paper. Here the ink's overwatered and we barely, down in the forested loam, disengage the gentle saint, his rounded hat molding his crown like thatch on low rooftrees...St. Jerome.                                      2 Hunched, sunk in a deep-toned wash, he cares only for the huge, softleaved book propped on his knees. At nightfall Jerome swallowed up by his Bible misses the wistful look of his lion withdrawn to the forested ridge, the drawing's diagonal. And from there, one can say that landscape exists: prowls and spinnies where a lion might wind a lioness, or his prey... He looks out on tree-clouded peaks, tiny hamlets, two lambs in a wattle-fold. What the lion sees, we see. For Jerome, though, the lion is Judah, his seal and seed— Jesse's stem drops thickset leaves for him to read.                                      3 Saskia, of course, thrones in painting. Still, tiny sketches tumble from odd cabinets: the dear in a lopsided turban or twilled garden hat, sketched "on my wedding-day"— Saskia. A cluster of lines, a rippled race of curls and cloudsets. And, for a rarity, in Rembrandt, flowers. The simple, surprised, smiling face of Saskia as Flora...After her fourth lying-in (she was dying), he took to long walks on the city's outskirts; his sketchbook came home with mere touches of charcoal, a reed, a waterfowl, estuarial shallows unfolding to the rim.                                      4 Now life is meaner, chaotic. Rushes of arousal, lawsuits, debts...this print of a kitchen drab, eyes wandering, mouth a vacant, uptilted half-lune, her work-swollen hands on Saskia's velvet shawl, The thighs parted, abdomen pear-pendulant, the pulled-off stocking-stays grooved in the flab to her copse of cross-hatchings—No one wants to see this. But his hand made this stock, of himself the substance and seed. Fine- spun cosmos, brown tangle, soft sign: the old man spares us nothing. The book, the look, the lieu, the end of the Line.
~~~
We start stopping when she’s afraid
something bad will happen. Don’t worry,
I say, all will be well.
 
How could she know? She’s never
read it, never heard of Elizabeth
and Jane, never wanted Mr. Darcy. Like me
 
she needs to know how things will end.
I know Elizabeth will be fine. As I knew,
last week, my sister weeping, that Elinor–
 
sobbing, begging–wouldn’t lose Marianne.
It’s Jane Austen! My sister doesn’t know that
in Austen nothing really bad happens. I leave her
 
on the couch with the last hours.
How much my sister will have to endure,
alone, with this new drama.
 
Later her message. The last one
in which she will sound like herself.Hi, it’s me. The movie was unbelievable. 
 Unbelievable. 
 
~~~
what she told me. What I honor. They, as unambiguous as Lyrae is:
black, bard, badass; svelte with flourishing braids; a singularity and
somehow all of them gathered as one like tributaries to the mouth of
the river of God—Gwendolyn and Lucille and June and—and I can’t
count all the ways I was saved that day, emerging wet from the ritual
to find myself sitting in some stranger’s living room, a writer who’d
been pushed out of their homeland by its persecutions, pulled into
America on the promise of asylum, the same America that commits
my own kind to institutions with routine and rarely second thoughts
signaling the presence of conscience, and while we’re on the subject
of right and wrong, know I’d read the news recently and retreated far
into my unfeeling before I received the blessing of her timely word,
walking in bloody boots through hallways leading to the chambers
where tenderness is said to rest in all of us by symbology, but then
I was called outside my bones again. And let me tell you, my friend:
you’ve never seen light before you’ve seen it. I swear, it’s as if with
the snap of a finger I could recite the very definition of gold without
needing to run yolk from the promise of a child, a happy day’s glow
spilling into the street like July’s laughter from a fire hydrant as we
left the house with folk who loved words and loved us—loved us—
so expansively. And less than two nights later we’re all throwing our
asses in a circle, cuttin’ up, working up what was an effortless sweat,
undeterred even as the music skipped on every hiccup of the fraying
wires, tethered just as strenuously to joy as ever, like always, trying
to catch a good breath, but I paid it no mind, no mind, no mind—no,
I wasn’t absent upstairs exactly, I was hyper-present; what a ghost is
to death I was to life, inside everything simultaneously—the sub and
the synth, the blown-off roof and hole-stomped floor, the rise of
their chests and the fall—and only nigga returned me to this plane:my nigga, my nigga, a lyric left on my bottom lip like the sweet after-
burn of Hennessy, but yo, it’s like I was being called for, called out
of need since I know that word only has such resonance in a world
where we ain’t free. And, nah, we ain’t free, if you were wondering.
There are no shackles on me your eyes can see but none that I can’t
feel as if they were appendages divided from me by the occurrence
of civil war, a set of chimeless chains that could be yanked on and
bring me, even at my most upright, to my knees. And if it happens—
again—I suppose I could pray, there, at my literally lowest moment,
immersed in the mess they’ve made that I’m tasked with cleaning
up for the commendation of pennies. I hope I don’t get shot while
genuflect since that’s apparently a thing now in this country, but I
worry such a selfish ask won’t have sufficient fuel to reach heaven,
that the bastardized sparrow will burn up in the atmosphere as easily
as tissue paper. And I recognize I’m rambling now, but I’m likewise
increasing my odds of bumping into the point of all this since inside
the milk of me something was stirred by what she said, but it’s hard
to translate a muscular language to a verbal one just as it’s hard to
relate to folk who don’t consider their own demise fifty ’leven times
a day at least, and for that relapse not to be an injurious ideation but
an itch of practicality. What I wouldn’t pay for the chance to not pay
attention to every little thing—how they talk near me and how they
talk when they believe I’m nowhere near, what they do or don’t do
with each other that they do or don’t do with me, the questions they
feel quite content to ask me and the ones they never seem to though
I leave the door open, the window, the bleeding heart. I know them
so well, people who wouldn’t know me from the next in the lineup;
I know them so intimately you’d think I love them all, and the gag is
that I do, by some undesired miracle, and that is part of all this, too.
To say they don’t deserve my time is an obvious statement, but they
take it anyway because it’s all they know, evident as I recount every
transgression taking seconds off my time on this earth, summing up
to years, almost to the point I’m gone already, in response to which
I either swallow spit or spit out ellipses. Ask the wounded wall what
I know of restraint, the manifesto I’d pen with what pours out from
my punctured knuckles, though, perhaps, the poet was signaling that,
all along, I’ve been teaching the most important life lesson merely by
domesticating rage, confining it inside the margins of the flesh that
my parents made for me, the page my life is written against each day
in corrective red ink. And this seems like the appropriate moment
to divulge that her sermon came during a dialogue about poetic craft
of all things, but if poetry can’t be applied to how one moves through
this world then I see very little worth in it, which is where it started
for me. Poetry was a dead white thing in my life once, at the bottom
of the trash can with the doll of Jesus they’d tried pawning off on me
back in Catholic school, but luckily I already knew one for us, by us,
and thus found the inner-strength to soldier through the barren winter
of lyrical delight rocking a pair of big-ass Timberlands and other on-
trend threads a person of greater gravitas could’ve filled out better
around the shoulders. But I digress—since what I really mean to be
speaking on is how the Cavalier poets weren’t really doing it for me
during high school, not because their explicit sexuality or their taste
for material excess and ambitious proximity to the throne were such
disagreeable subjects to me, at the time revisiting rap’s mafioso era,
but because when we painted those same pictures as we preferred to,
our tongues spiraling like ballerinas and bullets, they sought the ban
on sale or talked down on it as being absent of any artistic merit, as if
a nation’s worth of people surviving subjugation is more science than
art anyway, for if that were true, then we wouldn’t have a culture and
America wouldn’t have great product to push to the rest of the planet
aside from all the bombs it seems much keener on dropping casually
like Funkmaster Flex, and I’d already grown tired in my young age,
so tired, of trying to prove I’m not stupid even above trying to prove
I’m smart. And those who doubt there’s a difference have digging
to do, deep into their pockets to get me what I’m owed for damages,
for emotional distress and all things it’s been made feasible to sue for
with solid legal representation. Funny, I once longed to be a lawyer,
little fool that I was, my back against a brick wall painted by spotlight,
rifles lined and aiming, in that night’s vision—legal fluency seemed
the only option for release from this burden because it’s the language
my nemeses speak in. I do know bad English from black, but I know
power even better because I’ve brushed up against it just as a person
in any number of neighborhoods around here may have brushed up
against a police officer. Maybe it’s needless to say I didn’t go down
an attorney path; I actually don’t have a plan at all these days except
evading the bullet and also the bullet points corporations thrive on,
as if any of this is simple, as if I, symptom of systemic dysfunctions
enveloped by skeleton and skin, am something simple. I’d only ever
be two-dimensional if airbrushed on a blank T-shirt and even that
would show depth to someone’s esteem for who I was with no one
else nearby, and all this means is that there is more to me or anyone
alike than being menace or miscreant, minstrel or misanthrope, or
murdered as all four would be with equal fanfare. But what I really
want is to know what they feel when their black friend dies in that
typical way for it’s maybe the only thing I don’t know about them,
while we practice poker faces and draft FAQs. Forget seeing eye to
eye for a second. Set aside the particular grammars of forgiveness
we use without pulling up the problem’s root: do they still feel full
people if they put the hammer down? And when they can’t answer,
make note that I can because I have those tools and also others that
shall remain nameless in order to remain purposeful. That’s how I
prefer it, besting all desertions of their decency, which I say since
you’ve caught me rare and raw tonight, sipping off the bottle top,
slurring my songs, hitting my two-step on beat every. single. time.
Damn—how blessed they are to be able to watch me work around
them—as illegibly as what the miraculous Phillis Wheatley wrote
all over her master’s walls, owned in the moment, I feel, solely by
an ambition toward self-definition I also try applying prodigiously,
bringing them to speechlessness, a shaming kind of silence sayinglisten, leave me be because there’s no explaining me, thus there’s
no exploiting me: what only a history under thumb and foot helps
grasp before letting go, for one’s own good even more than mine.
~~~
When the moon’s worn scutcheon touches the flint-gray flood,I will lave him in foxglove and vetch until the bloodof his wretched heart heals.Without a scar, he stood—as the men make their way into the quaking wood.
~~~
Down milk-bright colonnades
the leper’s bell recedes.
Shades lowered against the gleaming waste of ice,
I sit back, bathe in lukewarm acquiescence.
Dutiful, prompt,
strapped, doped, a little drunk,
squinting at international afternoon
I’ll soon pass GO again.
And if these colored pencils, nose drops, passport
should plummet with the rest of the huge oval,
giant time capsule soft for the shark’s maw,
will a notebook ambered back to front with words
rescue me from oblivion?
Syrup of skittish travelers, fame. I yawn.
~~~
(Lord Egremont speaks)



It was a way of punishing the house, setting it ablaze
in ruddy, golden flames; smoke
in billows up the front stairs; walls
cringing like leaves.   
I say, I am afraid
in my own house. Do not believeI started this, it was
that man, who was to portray the park alone, mind you,
but then became
enamored of the music room.
And now what have we: floods
of fire rolling from room to room, furniture wrecked
in seethe, my wife   
Lady Amelia turned
wraith, God knows what fish
and drowning slaves cast up in the tide
along with pocket Bibles, snuffboxes, antimacassars, the   
familiar bric-a-brac of the well-kept house.
Where are Edward, Lavinia, Jane? Why
is no one crying, “Fire! Fire!”? Am I
alone?
         The man has no sense of proportion.
He had himself lashed to the mast, once, it is said,
on a steamboat off the harbor mouth
in full blizzard: sailors blinded by snow, the boat
crippled, led by the lead, they damn near died to a man, and he—
he was observing “the light at sea,” he said.
The painting? “Soapsuds and whitewash,”   
the critics described it so.
But here, in our house, it is catastrophe   
of flame, not weather, he loosed.
He is a man
in love with last things, clearly,the last things, but
never understood the first, it seems to me,   
and certainly not the genial medias res
of decorous, daily life.
What tea-times we’ve known in these chambers, what sonatinas,lieder of an evening, whist,
Emmeline embroidering, the hounds calm at the hearth, now all
dissolved.
               Perhaps there are no flames.   
A bloody haze arises, it could be
my own eyes that fail.
I hear nothing, but fear
the upstairs rooms, cramped rooms
I have not entered in ages, only remember
the draughts, creakings, grime in closet corners,   
windows too tight to lean from, the smell   
of antique damp. And now, who knows   
what acts unroll
on narrow beds, on floorboards warped askew?
As steam is rising, rising? As heat
buoys the house up into an atmosphere   
all of its own creation?
Who are
the participants? Where has Amelia gone?   
Why, in this furnace, can I hear no sound,   
or feel my own skin begin to peel?
~~~
Kitty Goes Kommando and the Goldman Rats — Phooey!That blue scaffolding holds up the sky. Who did we thinkwe were padlocking in, or out? Give me that hugelooping black script no one can read, a secret glyph,and just where someone has smashed the window, Jesusthe Way the Truth the Life and a dented aluminum frame.He bent down, we know, and wrote something illegible on the ground.A toothy black-and-white dinosaur gapes. I like the crackin this wall of monsters where skylines topple and ogrestwiddle train tracks in their claws like pipe cleaners.Down the long, semi-abandoned street in Queenscalligraphy gallops toward the shop displaying,like guitar strings, seven different iron rodsfor gates. Hole in the wall, rose sound-hole,ribbed sounding board — always from fissures and gapsmelody strains as trains thunderclank acrossthe girdered overpass, a siren keens, and a solitary manambles past amputated acacias fisting out with leaves.
~~~
I went to make kouign amann. It sounded Irisha
~~~
In this poem all artifice
is stripped away
but you are held under water.
In this poem you enter a mirrored dressing room
lit so that you look more beautiful than you have ever looked.
I recognize you with surprise.
In this poem you are by yourself.
~~~
for the Geechee Gullah Ring Shouters



One of the women greeted me.
I love you, she said. She didn't
Know me, but I believed her,
And a terrible new ache
Rolled over in my chest,
Like in a room where the drapes
Have been swept back. I love you,
I love you, as she continued
Down the hall past other strangers,
Each feeling pierced suddenly
By pillars of heavy light.
I love you, throughout
The performance, in every
Handclap, every stomp.
I love you in the rusted iron
Chains someone was made
To drag until love let them be
Unclasped and left empty
In the center of the ring.
I love you in the water
Where they pretended to wade,
Singing that old blood-deep song
That dragged us to those banks
And cast us in. I love you,
The angles of it scraping at
Each throat, shouldering past
The swirling dust motes
In those beams of light
That whatever we now knew
We could let ourselves feel, knew
To climb. O Woods—O Dogs—                       
O Tree—O Gun—O Girl, run—
O Miraculous Many Gone—
O Lord—O Lord—O Lord—
Is this love the trouble you promised?
~~~
We’re all pagans and shamans and clap your hands now we won’t stop the beatWe believe in divine healing and we hate to see that evening sun go downWe know when the sight of our women dressed in white each ritual night, is touching, hypnotizesThe animals blush and split for us as revival, as revealed to themselvesThese are triumphant women.Even Sister Fame hiding out in the alley turning tricks and singing verses from the undid scripture, is touchingThank you jesus, thank you jesus, that you jesus, baby, is that you, she mutters up high between rocks and lace — his eagerness — it was all night longSometimes he’d interrupt a recording session to tell us about his early Motown days or expand on his views of   Heaven and HellOne time he was saying how important it was to love one’s father.Do you love yours? I asked himWhy don’t you tell himWhy don’t you tell your father, he saidI will if you doYou go first
~~~
In another poem, called The Logic of Spring,

        a mechanical drawing of a tree
that I've passed a 100 times

         on my way to a different problem.
I glance backwards, and the stack of the day
multiplies, glancing backwards several times,
the dog-eared corner with the graph paper sky of that morning

        and the logic of spring.
Right before I wake, I hear the riposte of mean jays (blue dots

        that drag the pink banners of answers off the tree
with words in gold italic latin)

        from the fog pumped in by the machine
set on my lawn. First thing in the morning,
(page numbers in all the dish rags hanging around the sink)

         I part the buttery curtains
to see beyond the doric columns sitting on my porch & the

         hibiscus twig
that someone has set the stump of such a tree—gray

         smudges and still intact line breaks
with flashing pink splashes—
outside my house while I slept.
Seems unbearably cruel until

I realize that in the flapping fog I finally hear its questions.
Are you so easily distracted

         by pieces of a poem
attached to a tree?
         in which as the situation changes
you catch glimpses of yourself
         a series of emoticons.
~~~
after Bernadette Mayer



I guess it's too late to live on the farm
I guess it's too late to enter the darkened room in which a single light
illuminated the artist stripped from the waist down, smeared with
blood, stretched and bound to the table
I guess it's too late to inhabit a glass-fronted, white, box-like room,
dressed in white, against which the menstrual blood was visible
I guess it's too late to start farming
I guess it's too late to start struggling to remain standing in a
transparent plastic cubicle filled with wet clay, repeatedly slipping and
falling
I guess it's too late to buy 60,000 acres in Marfa
I guess it's too late to begin appearing on the subway in stinking
clothes during rush hour with balloons attached to her ears, nose, hair
and teeth
I guess we'll never have an orgiastic Happening
I guess we're too old to carry out maintenance activities in public
spaces, during public hours
I guess we couldn't afford to simulate masturbation while President
Josip Broz Tito's motorcade drove by below
I guess we're not suited to "I am awake in the place where women die"
I guess we'll never have a self-inflicted wound in front of an audience now
I guess entering a sex cinema dressed in a black shirt, jeans with the
crotch removed, and a machine gun slung over her shoulder is not in
the cards now
I guess Clive wouldn't make a good photographic montage in which
their male and female faces became almost indistinguishable
I guess I can't expect we'll ever have a selection of photographs derived
from images produced by the beauty industry now
I guess I'll have to give up all my dreams of being seen, clothed and
unclothed, being systematically measured by two male 'researchers'
who record her measurements on a chart and compare them with a set
of 'normal' measurements
I guess I'll never be waiting for my body to break down, to get ugly
We couldn't get tied together by our hair anyways though Allen
Ginsberg got one late in life
Maybe someday I'll have the foreshortened barrel of a gun pointing
toward the viewer
I guess joining our hands around the base's perimeter fence into which
they weave strands of wool is really out
Feeding the pigs and the chickens, walking between miles of rows of crops
I guess examining women's working conditions is just too difficult
We'll never have a, never-really-a-collective, a group of women who
came together to work on a public mural
Too much work and still to be poets
Who are the simultaneously-the-beneficiary-of-our-cultural-heritage-
and-a-victim-of-it-poets
Was there ever a poet who had a self-sufficient loss of certainty
Flannery O'Connor raised peacocks
And Wendell Berry has raised large-scale spirals of rusted industrial
materials in incongruous natural and commercial spaces
Faulkner may have spent three days in a gallery with a coyote, a little
And Robert Frost asked a friend to shoot him at close range with a .22 
caliber rifle
And someone told me Samuel Beckett lay hidden under a gallery-wide
ramp, masturbating while vocalizing into a loudspeaker his fantasies
about the visitors walking above him
Very few poets are really going to the library carrying a concealed tape
recording of loud belches
If William Carlos Williams could be a doctor and Charlie Vermont too,
If Yves Klein could be an artist, and Jackson Pollock too,
Why not a poet who was also dying of lymphoma and making a series of
life size photographs, self-portrait watercolors, medical object-sculptures
and collages made with the hair she lost during chemotherapy
Of course there was Brook Farm
And Virgil raised bees
Perhaps some poets of the past were overseers of the meticulous
chronicle of the feeding and
                    excretory cycles of her son during the first six months of his life
I guess poets tend to live more momentarily
Than life in her body as the object of her own sculpting activity would allow
You could never leave the structures made of wood, rope and concrete
blocks assembled to form
                    stocks and racks, to give a reading
Or to go to a lecture by Emerson in Concord
I don't want to be continuously scrubbing the flesh off of cow bones
with a cleaning brush but
                    my mother was right
I should never have tried to rise out of the proletariat
Unless I can convince myself as Satan argues with Eve
That we are among a proletariat of poets of all the classes
Each ill-paid and surviving on nothing
Or on as little as one needs to survive
Steadfast as any person's glottis, photographed with a laryngoscope,
speaking the following
                    words: "The power of language continues to show its trace for
a long time after silence"
                    and fixed as the stars
Tenants of a vision we rent out endlessly
~~~
From loss of  the old and lack of  the new
From failure to make the right thing do
Save us, Lady Mary Wortley Montagu.
     From words not the word, from a feckless voice
     From poetic distress and from careless choice
     Exclude our intellects,  James Joyce.
From genteel angels and apostles unappalled
From Hollywood visions as virgins shawled
Guard our seeing, Grünewald.
     From calling a kettle an existential pot,
     From bodying the ghost of  whatever is not,
     John save us, O most subtle Scot.
From pace without cadence, from pleasures slip-shod
From eating the pease and rejecting the pod
Wolfgang keep us, lover of God.
      Couperin come with your duple measure
      Alter our minds against banal pleasure.
Dürer direct with strictness our vision;
Steady this flesh toward your made precision.
     Mistress of accurate minor pain,
     Lend wit for forbearance, prideless Jane.
From pretending to own what we secretly seek,
From (untimely, discourteous) the turned other cheek,
Protect our honor, Demetrius the Greek.
     From ignorance of structural line and bone
     From passion not pointed on truth alone
     Attract us, painters on Egyptian stone.
     From despair keep us, Aquin’s dumb son;
     From despair keep us, Saint Welcome One;
     From lack of despair keep us, Djuna and John Donne.
That zeal for free will get us in deep,
That the chance to choose be the one we keep
That free will steel self  in us against self-defense
That free will repeal in us our last pretense
That free will heal us
      Jeanne d’Arc, Job,  Johnnie Skelton,
      Jehan de Beauce, composer  Johann,
      Dark  John Milton, Charter Oak  John,
Strike deep, divide us from cheap-got doubt;
Leap, leap between us and the easy out;
Teach us to seize, to use, to sleep well, to let go;
Let our loves, freed in us, gaudy and graceful, grow.
 
  Originally appeared in the June 1957 issue of Poetry magazine. 
~~~
There are two kinds of people, soldiers and women,
as Virginia Woolf said. Both for decoration only.
Now that is too kind. It’s technical: virgins and wolves.
We have choices now. Two little girls walk into a bar,
one orders a shirley temple. Shirley Temple’s pimp
comes over and says you won’t be sorry. She’s a fine
piece of work but she don’t come cheap. Myself, I’m
in less fear of predators than of walking around
in my mother’s body. That’s sneaky, that’s more
than naked. Let’s even it up: you go on fuming in your
gray room. I am voracious alone. Blank and loose,
metallic lingerie. And rare black-tipped cigarettes
in a handmade basket case. Which of us weaves
the world together with a quicker blur of armed
seduction: your war-on-thugs, my body stockings.
Ascetic or carnivore. Men will crack your glaze
even if you leave them before morning. Pigs
ride the sirens in packs. Ah, flesh, technoflesh,
there are two kinds of people. Hot with mixed
light, drunk on insult. You and me.
~~~
Trying to see the proportional relation
Of one memory to another
One is so strange, and then
To try and see what looms
And doesn’t for the other person
Who was there, it gets stranger,
Especially when you’ve read
His email.
I don’t know how people
Understand their lives, measure
Their sensations against “objective”
Or so-to-speak democratic estimations,
Whether people accept the externality
Of events, “events,” as things
That happen to them. I refuse
To accept some coagulate
Of other people’s
Impressions in exchange for this
Privacy, no matter how flawed it is.
This is lyric poetry. It has to be. It has
No other hope. What was it
About you and me that made whatever
Happen to us. In New York
Everything fell apart. What I dreaded
And expected.
But still. Tonight
It is dark and the weather is cooler
Than it’s been. It has taken
A while for Fall to break; the global
Warming kept me in summer
Love with you like I was under a
Fermata. Now that the times
Are changing, I feel
Even more for you; or I feel nothing.
I can’t tell; it’s kind
Of scary. I was sick of thinking
About you this morning but
I was listening to Bob Dylan and Leonard
Cohen in order to think about
You for literary purposes.
When I feel nothing for a person
I get scared I’m losing my humanity
And that turning cold means
My heart’s been botoxed: we’re
All fucked.
I watched a movie on YouTube
Called Ladies and Gentlemen, MisterLeonard Cohen that was made when
He was still just a poet and only
Famous in Canada.
He’s a pretentious little nerd
In it, self-important, teacher’s pet wit.
I think that, making music, he became
So much nakeder, much more desperate.
The talent, real, even pure, evenNatural, had to ripen in
The artificial man.
Alain Badiou, on the day
Of his class, said, “Because an event
Is pure rapture, an event disappears
Immediately: it does not exist
Objectively, but only by appearing
And disappearing.” This is both
Precise and vague; it is attractive
I guess. I guess since you and me did not
Disappear immediately, it was
Not pure rapture, not in these
Terms, but my smile
Was real each time I swallowed
Your cum. Getting
Fucked by you was great; I could
Feel it in my organs, but
You didn’t make me go insane
Except for maybe once
Or twice. Actually maybe I am
Being unfair. Maybe the fucking really
Was that great. In this moment I
Can’t remember.
I just read a poetry
Review in which the reviewer
States that a certain book
Made his cock feel as though
It were tall as a tree. That’s
Nice. I have no idea
What it feels like to have
A cock. Sometimes I feel
As though I’m getting close
To understanding and then
Something happens to make
Me have no clue again. When Sinan
Fucks me, we lose our individuality
So severely it’s like we’re both
Gasping after an animal that’s his
Cock that is beyond us and I lose
All sense of the world. His cock’s
Not even him, and he’s not him either
And we aren’t anything.
It’s strange, the possessive. Didn’t Thomas
Mann write a book called HerrUnd Hund or something like that?
Man’s best friend. What belongs
To him. Me and Sunder
Talked about how scary and arousing
It is to watch men masturbate, cos
Everyone relates differently to his.
Like dicks are always almost but never
Quite another. Je est un autre,
Said that brat Arthur Rimbaud.
I am definitely in love with you
As I write this. You are so petty
And superfluous I cannot stand
You. Sinan is definitely
In love with me. I know, because
I saw him tonight. I love
Him too. You are gracious
To accord me the space and time
In which to develop, or to elaborate
Upon, as the French say, these
Extreme emotions I am, despite
The odds and certain lapses,
So capable of feeling.
It was good to slap
Your face and to admit
That your asshole
Made me nervous.
Your eyes had a way
Of going soft and shiny
When you said the really
Tender things. We admitted
It was intimidating
For us both to hear each other describe
People we’ve fucked and been
In love with. I’m proud of what
We accomplished together. Alain Badiou
Ended his class with a reading
Of “Ariane et Barbe-Bleue” which
Is an opera by Paul Dukas. You
And me had gone pretty far
By the time this day came, and
Something very fragile in me breaks
When somebody says my name, or
Even a variant of it. I was tired.
I think Badiou discusses “Ariane”
In Being and Event which
I have not read. In class he said
That the story of the opera is
About the relationship between law
And freedom, and that it shows
That the desire for freedom is not
So simple. Ariane experiences an Event
That causes her to demand freedom, Badiou
Said, but she is unable to convince anybody
Else, any other women to want freedom; she ends up alone.
She genuinely falls in love with the wicked
Bluebeard at the beginning. Bluebeard
Who previously got women by having a castle
To lock them in. This woman Ariane
Does not have to be taken
By force. When she enters
His castle he hands
Her seven keys, six
Of which he gives her permission
To use, and leaves. She hears the cries
Of his other, imprisoned wives,
Coming from behind a door. So she uses
The forbidden key, releasing them.
Meanwhile Bluebeard is assaulted
By the local peasants, who want
To free Ariane, fearing her fate will turn out like
That of the women who came before her.
But Ariane is already free
In herself, and proves this freedom
By bringing the wounded Bluebeard
Home, caring tenderly for him, and then
Declaring that she’s leaving him for good.
By the end Bluebeard’s shattered, sobbing,
Bleeding. Ariane
Invites the other wives to leave with her
In a wrenching aria, pleading
With them one by one to taste
With her the freedom awaiting
Them, The World. But they all prefer confinement
Even though they had longed
For freedom before Ariane opened
Their door. Once liberty arrived they were no
Longer capable of it, preferring to serve; even a gutted,
Hollowed-out power. Ariane exits
Alone. The end. Badiou narrated
This with emotion and
I cried. Maybe cos I was tired and
That thing about my name or because
I am not heroic or free.
I had missed half of Alain Badiou’s
Lectures messing around with you
On the couch by the fire; in the women’s
Toilets; up on the hill. If this were a suitable parable,
And it isn’t, I would try to tell myself
That those very early mornings in Brooklyn when I sat
Up in your bed feeling wrong and
Got dressed and walked away, I should
Have stayed away cos I don’t need you.
Maybe I don’t need you. But I want
You. Maybe I don’t love you. But
I am getting to know you. Maybe
What made me cry in class was how tired
I was and how sad and hard
It is, and how rare, to undertake an act
That’s truly free, and not just a response
To a confused surge of drives and  fears.
~~~
My shell said she likes the king and queen of the Poetry Palace because they listen to her. She tells them all the secrets of the ocean.
~~~
All my life I’ve asked my master
Why I am unable to choose
This sweet man or fancy shoes
Over this stranger, more difficult lover
And these expensive but practical loafers
And why I am unable to author
A book exhibiting my full potential
And have focused instead on inconsequential
Letters to strange and difficult lovers
Who by my letters were never changed.
I certainly haven’t been constrained
By terrible parents or trauma or poverty
And even if I had it wouldn’t explain
My propensity for misery
Anymore than it would my
Propensity for joy.
Maybe I’m just a procrastinator
As life is a procrastination of death
And each breath just a procrastination of breath
And friends a procrastination of work
And work a procrastination of love
And love a procrastination I’m just not above.
~~~
The heat out there this evening
 
is contained heat like things keep applicable boxes
 
at the ready then subsume their diverging constituent parts
 
long ambivalent talks into midnight, all those
 
glowy Sophia Coppola movies, Prosecco
 
the sexiest records I know. I don’t feel
 
how I know anymore to be more than something seeking
 
my appalling lack of cinematic knowledge, fictive innocence
 
& something like the break-down of those little boxes
 
little tombs put their hands up in front of my mouth
 
there’s a tacitly humiliating eulogy to drown out couldn’t feel
 
much more stupid about feeling stupid over feeling
 
stupid, living. Let me go & watch something
 
moving several images some of them symbolize humility broken
 
postures bloodshot eyes, intimately talking through this
 
publicly I am not developing at all but just the same. So hot
 
outside in the evening heat locking hazy jonquils
 
& sunflowers dead for two weeks, ridiculously
 
mournful as I’ll try & dimly think of the last real shock.
 
I remember disgust perhaps & something like alarm (the phone
 
going off in the middle of the night) pervasive disappointment
 
&, for sure, horror, but shock?, as if the heat were seceding from the frames
 
of its containment thought & feeling & establishing some wonderama
 
ratios & beanpole features quick to surge beyond the human model.
 
I know I do the heat out there this evening
 
will & maybe I should be the one I know who has to stop.
 
If I have to heal myself completely every time before I start
 
I shouldn’t be. I think about the god of demurrment in the world
 
or I think about it later having fallen to its love spell — the heat
 
keeps me shut up at the table in the evening
 
at the laptop arranging each letter with the same affectless love
 
it’s nothing moving Avery born & Vivian to come December
 
Kermit the Frog sings the Ave Maria while the white flag is endlessly
 
lowered & raised through the whole master/slave dialectic forever.
 
Don’t let me be wistful. Let me be the actual heat, forgiven
 
its severity & leaving for the year. Mercy is just like the children’s zoo it’s real
 
weird to think about anything now, think how fucking hard
 
a fucking beach read used to be sewn into its spine
 
delicious words from start to finish I could just
 
lay there & die it’s so goddamn nice in this sigh vitrine real 9/11
 
kind of midnight Friday midnight, lamely shifting in my chair, the fan
 
that stops the love that moves the world that stops goes out on gold
 
weeks other weeks it just sits in the back.
 
It collects statically. I hate that.
~~~
The best-known German goldsmith of the sixteenth century, Wenzel Jamnitzer, is also remembered for his study of the five platonic solids, Perspectives of Regular Bodies, in which he proposed that out of the same five bodies one can go on endlessly making all other bodies.
The five solids originate with Pythagoras, but are named after Plato, who paired four of the five solids with each of the four elements and the fifth with heaven to make up the difference: tetrahedron (fire), octahedron (air), cube (earth), icosahedron (water), and dodecahedron (heaven).
The idea is that the universe is made up of a handful of shapes and out of these shapes other shapes are made.
In a letter to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and the Nobel Prize Committee, Chubby Checker claimed to have invented the dance that begat all other modern dances.
Speaking of himself in third person he wrote, “Chubby Checker changed everything. He gave movement to a music that never had this movement before. The styles changed. The nightclub scene is forever changed. Checker gave birth to aerobics.”
The song originally called “What a monotonous melody,” written in five minutes on a dare, begat “Limbo Rock” begat “Let’s Limbo Some More” begat “Mary Ann Limbo” begat “Limbo Rock/Do the Limbo Rock,” as “The Twist” begat “Let’s Twist Again” begat “Slow Twistin’” begat “Twist It Up” begat “The Twist (Yo, Twist!).”
Checker calls his dance “dancing apart to the beat,” not dancing separate from the beat, but two people dancing separate from one another.
“Limbo Rock” ends in a whistle.
Limbo, the dance, comes from Trinidad, where it was danced at wakes, but in reverse: the bar began at the lowest height and was raised to symbolize a rising from death into life.
Dante’s limbo is the best circle of Hell, all those unbaptized babies and old philosophers to snuggle up with at night.
“Mary Ann Limbo” starts with a whistle.All day, all night, Mary Ann
Down by the sea side siftin’ sand
Even little children love Mary Ann
Down by the seaside siftin’ sand
Take a shape.
Repeat it — translate it, reflect it over a line, rotate it around a point — and you’ve got symmetry.
Go, go, go, go: that’s it!
That’s gold.
~~~
I counted till they danced so
Their slippers leaped the town –
And then I took a pencil
To note the rebels down –
And then they grew so jolly
I did resign the prig –
And ten of my once stately toes
Are marshalled for a jig!
 
~~~
Roger a doleful widower,
 Full eighteen weeks had been,When he, to meet the milk-maid Nell
 Came smiling o’er the green.Blithe as a lad of seventeen,
 He thus accosted Nell;Give me your pail, I’ll carry it
 For you, if you think well.Says Nell, indeed my milking-pail
 You shall not touch, I vow;I’ve carried it myself before,
 And I can carry it now.So side by side they walked awhile,
 Then he at last did say;My inclination is to come
 And see you, if I may.Nell understood his meaning well,
 And briskly answered she;You may see me at any time,
 If you look where I be.Says he, but hear me yet awhile,
 I’ve something more to tell;I gladly would a sweetheart be
 Unto you, Mistress Nell.A sweetheart I don’t want, says Nell,
 Kind Sir, and if you do,Another you may seek, for I
 Am not the lass for you.When she had made him this reply,
 He’d nothing more to sayBut — Nelly, as good night to you,
 And homeward went his way.
~~~
Mute is thy wild harp, now, O Bard sublime!    Who, amid Scotia’s mountain solitude, Great Nature taught to “build the lofty rhyme,”    And even beneath the daily pressure, rude, Of laboring Poverty, thy generous blood, Fired with the love of freedom—Not subdued    Wert thou by thy low fortune: But a time    Like this we live in, when the abject chime Of echoing Parasite is best approved,    Was not for thee—Indignantly is fled Thy noble Spirit; and no longer moved    By all the ills o’er which thine heart has bled,    Associate worthy of the illustrious dead, Enjoys with them “the Liberty it loved.” 
~~~
                                                                    Saturday morning
two hawks flew over the soccer field and swooped in low
as Abram almost scored a goal. Moses, on the sideline, sat
on a stray ball reading a book, not looking up at the game
or the hawks or his brother who noticed. That night
at the Basic Trust Day Care Poker Tournament I got knocked
out with queen/nine against queen/jack by Dan Shiffman
who seemed almost sad to beat me. I sucked on ginger candies
and held new baby Phoebe Kate, born on the same due date
as the baby I miscarried. When she left I cried and had more candies.
In the end, Josh beat everyone and won a 40-inch flat-screen TV.
                                                                    Sunday morning
I couldn’t sleep so got up early, went to the Hell’s Kitchen
flea market and bought a dining table and chairs from a man
named Toney. Bargained him down to $690 (including delivery)
because “the chairs need new upholstery.” A 1950ish Danish
with expandable top and funny splayed feet—it reminds me
of my late Grandma Lotty, her sister Marguerite, and the heavy-laden
tables of childhood. I’ve no idea what it will look like
with my small family gathered round or if I’ll overworry
the polished surface. We’ll see—
it arrives on Tuesday.
                                                                    This morning
I got a stack of papers from sophomore lit. The top two
had the author’s name misspelled. I’ve not yet looked at
any others. I talked in class about how Art Spiegelman
chose realism over sentiment, how we conflate historical time
with personal time, how on 9/11 I took my nine-month old son
to his first day of day care and the city expoloded, went up
in smoke, and no one but me cares that he spent hours there,
only nine months old, while we watched TV in our phone-jammed
airspace, breathed in fumes, tried to give blood, wondered was there
anywhere, anywhere we could or should
                                                                                               flee to?—
Josh called right after class and said he’d gotten “strong intent” from an agent
who’s “all about the money.”
Nothing disastrous happened this week. Not so far. Unless you count
what I saw next, between classes on my way to read student poems
at Empanada Mama’s on 48th and 9th. A teenage boy lying on his side
in the middle of the street. The traffic stopped and a crowd watched
while six or seven other boys ran back and forth and stamped down
hard on his skull. I turn a gag into a kind of cough and dial 911We’ve already called the fucking police, says a woman as I retch
into an empty trash can. Finally three teenage girls surround the boy
and the other boys move off.
                                                                                Later,
on my way back to Fordham, I stop a cop and ask
about the boy. EMTs got him, says the officer.They had no shame, no fear, even with all of us watching . . . I tell him.They’re kids, ma’am, he says. You know what kids is like.
                                                                              Tonight
in Writer’s Workshop I & II I read two cantos from Model Homes
by Wayne Koestenbaum and then “A Poet’s Life” by David Trinidad.These poems hijack form and make it present, contemporary, immediate. Look how
Wayne puts a plumber and lovers, his mother, porn mags, fashion into terza rima
that lead us along, punch drunk, addicted to real life. And oh how David’s crown
of sonnets breaks our hearts!
~~~
With her one horrid eye persistently unfastened, a vigilant bird watched my grandfather during the Great Depression use each evening of one whole year to wander his corn fields knowing this world is just one pig after another in one pen after another. Therefore, the bird heard him suppose, shouldn’t he with his best gun, machete, Buick, or rope terminate his acquaintance with the tiresome setup of breakfast-lunch-dinner-dawn-dusk-fall-winter-spring-summer- blah-blah-blah? But his girls were good-looking and made such fine pies, so the bird watched him live wretchedly until he died more naturally of cancer too soon to see his people become the dopefiends, doctor-haters, masturbators, insomniacs, sleep fanatics, shut-ins, and teetotalers the bird knew they would become, for the purpose of girls is to just ruin everything with wanton reproduction so that now now now it’s really relentless—how heavy his people got in their limbs and how torrential, thus, the frenzied wind, though beyond the eye of the bird is the small, ashen brain of the bird, and below that, a heart, I swear, through which come the iffy notes of this cruel song. 
~~~
There is
no
audience
because
there is
no audience.
So if you speak only to
imagined beings
what does "only" mean?
--------------------------
This building formerly a restaurant . . .
this small room has been scraped of its paint 
and denuded of most former furniture: but 
also it has grown in size—can a building be 
enticed to grow? Because it is now as big as an 
airplane hangar.
--------------------------
Your
          beautiful face 
unbloodied beneath
          flies
Mother of flies your
          beauty 
to turn to. If only 
the audience
could see how
you are peaceful and the
          flies 
languid, glossy
But the audience will still bring
          its own feelings 
to these 
words
not seeing you
               not seeing 
what I 
am present for.
--------------------------
Who has left me 
here, I have.
Who are your 
familiars
                   Come 
            into the 
enlarging 
page if you dare
--------------------------
     Because he invented 
your shape I do mean 
structure
because he invented you badly 
           everything is still hidden.
--------------------------
I was to impale myself on a
quadrangular
steel rod, with a blunt end
                     with a blunt end 
which would make puncture
      more difficult 
and I tried—it's too hard. I can't 
Okay said the voice. I can't 
Okay
then I was weeping
                              But it's blood! I'm 
crying blood! I 
screamed
That's part of it
said the voice.
---------------------------
I think this is hard.
(That's part of it)
How they prefer him must go.
I think this is difficult singing
Length and repetition 
         create power
If this voice can return like 
         a body
It resembles something that's already been, 
Changing.
------------------------------
Chestnuts broken
autumnal fungi
so you will remember, that
          it's fall 
outside
         falling. you'll go down
this is no story for the puling
          social classes 
No not at all 
it's for us my familiars say 
who let me weep blood on their ground.
~~~
A violent luck and a whole sample and even then quiet.   Water is squeezing, water is almost squeezing on lard. Water, water is a mountain and it is selected and it is so practical that there is no use in money. A mind under is exact and so it is necessary to have a mouth and eye glasses.   A question of sudden rises and more time than awfulness is so easy and shady. There is precisely that noise.   A peck a small piece not privately overseen, not at all not a slice, not at all crestfallen and open, not at all mounting and chaining and evenly surpassing, all the bidding comes to tea.   A separation is not tightly in worsted and sauce, it is so kept well and sectionally.   Put it in the stew, put it to shame. A little slight shadow and a solid fine furnace.   The teasing is tender and trying and thoughtful.   The line which sets sprinkling to be a remedy is beside the best cold.   A puzzle, a monster puzzle, a heavy choking, a neglected Tuesday.   Wet crossing and a likeness, any likeness, a likeness has blisters, it has that and teeth, it has the staggering blindly and a little green, any little green is ordinary.   One, two and one, two, nine, second and five and that.   A blaze, a search in between, a cow, only any wet place, only this tune.   Cut a gas jet uglier and then pierce pierce in between the next and negligence. Choose the rate to pay and pet pet very much. A collection of all around, a signal poison, a lack of languor and more hurts at ease.   A white bird, a colored mine, a mixed orange, a dog.   Cuddling comes in continuing a change.   A piece of separate outstanding rushing is so blind with open delicacy.   A canoe is orderly. A period is solemn. A cow is accepted.   A nice old chain is widening, it is absent, it is laid by.
~~~
Oft have I thrilled at deeds of high emprise,And yearned to venture into realms unknown,Thrice blessed she, I deemed, whom God had shownHow to achieve great deeds in woman’s guise. Yet what discov’ry by expectant eyesOf foreign shores, could vision half the throneFull gained by her, whose power fully grownExceeds the conquerors of th’ uncharted skies?So would I be this woman whom the worldAvows its benefactor; nobler far,Than Sybil, Joan, Sappho, or Egypt’s queen.In the alembic forged her shafts and hurledAt pain, diseases, waging a humane war;Greater than this achievement, none, I ween.
~~~
When the mink ran across the meadow in bunched
black parabolas, I thought
sine and cosine, but no — 
the movement never dips
below the line. The creature vanished
into barberries. Absolute
predator who cracks a rabbit’s spine
in one bite. And my mind
leapt along a track to a summer field
where I walked years ago
to a stony spit out into the North Atlantic
with a young man I hardly knew, and his sister.
He was bald, dying
of a brain tumor. I ignored
his illness and we spoke of history.
He was gentle, scholarly. Why
do I remember him
when it was his sister I painted seated in tall grass,
her forehead wide, brown hair framing her face,
ocean a cobalt swatch behind?
Islands humped in little arcs across the bay.
That canvas is stacked in a closet.
But it’s the dead boy
I’ve stored inside me all these years,
scared of the otherworldly light
around his eyes. Scared and ashamed
of what I didn’t know. Ashamed of my fear
that made his death, when it came,
unspeakable. So history bounds
into the present, glitter-eyed, with musky anal glands
and daggering eyeteeth. Because that boy
wasn’t dead: he must be killed again.
~~~
I’ll snip your hair   Cut it all off until you look like a man   I will replace your weight loss bars with bars to make you gain   I will cut your credit cards in half   I will shrink all your clothes   Every trick in the book I will try   I will give all your shoes to the dog   I will do it all   Crazy is where you will be driven   Off a cliff you will want to jump   Then when I am all done   I will look at you with big doughy eyes   And I will say I am sorry   But I have my fingers crossed   
~~~
I am the Angel with the Broken Wing,The one large statue in this quiet room.The staff finds me too fierce, and so they shutFaith’s ardor in this air-conditioned tomb.The docents praise my elegant designAbove the chatter of the gallery.Perhaps I am a masterpiece of sorts—The perfect emblem of futility.Mendoza carved me for a country church.(His name’s forgotten now except by me.)I stood beside a gilded altar whereThe hopeless offered God their misery.I heard their women whispering at my feet—Prayers for the lost, the dying, and the dead.Their candles stretched my shadow up the wall,And I became the hunger that they fed.I broke my left wing in the Revolution(Even a saint can savor irony)When troops were sent to vandalize the chapel.They hit me once—almost apologetically.For even the godless feel something in a church,A twinge of hope, fear? Who knows what it is?A trembling unaccounted by their laws,An ancient memory they can’t dismiss.There are so many things I must tell God!The howling of the dammed can’t reach so high.But I stand like a dead thing nailed to a perch,A crippled saint against a painted sky.
~~~
There, garland dandelions round that idol with a corn husk face &  beard patched with rat stubble from a barber’s dust pan, parade float driven by a carriage pulled by a pig. Two sticks knotted together, cake frost on that crude wood to make it gilt. There, spider cranks &  iron gyres, blueberry stain glass sprout like wings from coal burn cars, a trumpet toots the sorrow of another boy dead, there he is, limp on a gurney wrapped in gingham scrap, there, he’s blast. There, roofless houses, sarong utopias balloon, balloon toward the sky, while women beat, beat their skulls. I trail behind, mop in hand, sloshing scum water over memorials. There he stares at my tic-torn cankered face, &  begs for alms, his face horse rudder red. A son, he huffs, it is a son I want. I spit into them corned mitt hands.
~~~
In the story of my life there is a fieldfilled with chicory, daisies, and mayflowers.It’s the field behind my childhood house.In summer, I used to spend hours lying in it looking at cloudsbefore my mother brought us to the town poolwhere I spent some more hours swimming.In the other seasons I went to school.In the school there was a library. In the story of my life there is a book.The book was bound in rough green cloth.Its glossy pages smelled oddly like puke. The book told the story of two children,Johnnie and Jill, I think.They got lost in a deep forest,drawn in thick dark ink. They were brother-and-sister orphans.They met fantastical creatures.One was the goddess of spring, or was that in Botticelli’s picturethat I saw in the same libraryin a book of art history for kids,old European art of course. The other kinds they did not want us to know about.The picture was magicand so was Johnnie and Jillthough not a children’s classic.I don’t really remember the title.In the book the goddess of springrescues the children in troubleand then — I can’t remember a thing.I’m sure there was a villainin the book, probably a woman, who practiced dark arts on a dark hill,so evil she wasn’t human. In the story of my life there is a hillthat tamely rises above the field.We sledded there in winter.In spring our bikes wheeleddown the hill dangerously.I walked on the hill this summertamely, carefully, slowly,alongside my mother.It isn’t hard to saywhat had brought us there. We were old and middle-agedin the knife-like summer air.Slowly and tamely we walkedand I remembered the book.It was called — Julie and John?I wanted another look.So what was the title?And was it an allegory?A Catholic one? (It was a Catholic school.)That would ruin the story.A story is only good if it’s made upbut convinces you it’s true.Even better if one of the charactersis someone who could be you.How else do you know who you are?I once asked an old strange friend:You only know you’re the person who’s withthe people you love, in the end. 
~~~
We deemed the secret lost, the spirit gone,
Which spake in Greek simplicity of thought,
And in the forms of gods and heroes wrought
Eternal beauty from the sculptured stone,—
A higher charm than modern culture won
With all the wealth of metaphysic lore,
Gifted to analyze, dissect, explore.
A many-colored light flows from one sun;
Art, ’neath its beams, a motley thread has spun;
The prism modifies the perfect day;
But thou hast known such mediums to shun,
And cast once more on life a pure, white ray.
Absorbed in the creations of thy mind,
Forgetting daily self, my truest self I find.
~~~
I ask not wit, nor beauty do I crave,
Nor wealth, nor pompous titles wish to have;
But since, 'tis doomed through all degrees of life,
Whether a daughter, sister, or a wife;
That females should the stronger males obey,
And yield implicit to their lordly sway;
Since this, I say, is ev'ry woman's fate,
Give me a mind to suit my slavish state.
~~~
and you press into the dark, imagine
the stranger two rows back, that fragile
chance you’ll forget in the second trailer.
 
Now it’s quiet, still
this burden of being watcher and screen
and what floats across it–light pouring out
 
its time and necklines and train wrecks.
What a relief to yield to the EXIT
sign red “I” blinking like a candle.
 
Soon the enormous figures moving
across rooms, the emphatic narrative
arcs. (There’s the thrum of the subway,
 
its engine of extras.) Here now
the beginning of trivia tests. Warning puppets
with brown-bag faces and fringy hair.
 
You’re almost here. But what you want
is the after. How yourself you are now
walking into the night, full moon over Houston Street,
 
at the bright fruit stand touching the yellow
mums. Here you are: Woman with Cilantro
listening to the rattle of the wrap,
 
the paper sound paper makes after you
have heard movie paper. Apples are more apples.
Paper more paper. Cilantro, its sweaty green self.
~~~
After Miguel and Erykah Badu



If you be the needle
                 I be the LP.
If you be the buffed wall,
                 I be the Krylon.
If you be the backspin,
                 I be the break.
If you be the head nod,
                 I be the bass line.
If you be a Phillie,
                 I be the razor.
If you be microphone,
                 then I be palm.
If you be cipher,
                 then I be beatbox.
If you be hands thrown up,
                 then I be yes, yes, y’all.
If you be throwback,
                 then I be remix.
If you be footwork,
                 then I be uprock.
If you be turntable,
                 then I be crossfader.
If you be downtown C train,
                 then I be southbound Red Line.
If you be shell toes,
                 then I be hoodie.
If you be freestyle,
                 then I be piece book.
If you be Sharpie,
                 then I be tag.
If you be boy,
                 then I be girl
                 who wants to
                 sync samples
                 into classic.
~~~
one box falls out of another box, ashy covenant of separation
two birds, one clamp, no reaction just hanging there as the arrow moved
notes put the map back into the water
they don’t notice what they’re learning
name all the days, parts of them painted to look out of control then crashed into a tree
letters in the boxes in the light old lady opportunity
the mirror ceases to be right here, pressure on the hand sends a biscuit to the mouth
a circuit connected by eyes stopping watching
quantity of information in the type, nation in the line or lines
legs broken and maladroit preview a long corridor filing against
walls engaging hands going without end in the corridor
back to front to quay, cracking of wood, a miner’s ladder five meters high
notices filled with objects
later, however, a gelatin lit up, Chinese cryptesthesia, American music
mural fold or fist, magnetic moment measures behavior, thinking penetrates slowly
start over a sensible solution, a compact rower’s body zippered
into an orange flight suit, all the confidence of the Chinese navy exposing a big area extinct of life forms
~~~
Leave it to the street vendors of NYC to improvise a shrine from whatever they find,  setting a place at their table for animal and divine nature symbolically joined with color-coded floral candelabras.
~~~
Some gentler passion slide into my mind,
For I am soft and made of melting snow
—Queen Elizabeth I



 

Her sex sent her mother

to the tower,

made her father profligate

with arrogant desires,

 

but she was made of flint

and backbone.

 

Think of a young girl

in a blue velvet bodice,

a white collar and lace,

the very prototype

of virginal.

 

Think of a woman, her court

enlivened by suitors and lovers

in doublets, in brocaded cloaks,

despite suspicions of their motives

staining the sheets,

 

the way cups of spicy,

flowery mead were sipped

despite the possibility

of poison.

 

Even the crown of the sun

must go down each night.

 

Could she have stood at the prow

of a ship in that great Armada she ordered,

instead of at a window, waiting

for urgent results?

 

Could she have guessed that the words

of a man she inspired, carved

into the marble of ages,

had a muscular beauty

more than equal

to her own worldly triumphs?

 

Daughter, Queen, Ruler

of roiling seas, of meandering

rivers and meadows,

of armies of soldiers, their swords

and armor glittering

like planets to her sun.

 

Namesake to an age.

 

And Poet?

When she turned

to the empty parchment

(or once to a windowpane,

a diamond for quill)

everything

must have gone quiet.

 

Even a queen is naked

before the naked page, awaiting

not the generous spoils owed to a victor

but the gifts freely given

of a besotted muse.
~~~
Oft, when my lips I open to rehearse Thy wondrous spell of wisdom, and of power, And that my voice, and thy immortal verse, On listening ears, and hearts, I mingled pour, I shrink dismayed – and awful doth appear The vain presumption of my own weak deed; Thy glorious spirit seems to mine so near, That suddenly I tremble as I read – Thee an invisible auditor I fear: Oh, if it might be so, my master dear! With what beseeching would I pray to thee, To make me equal to my noble task, Succor from thee, how humbly would I ask, Thy worthiest works to utter worthily.
~~~
After IVAN ALBRIGHT’s Into the World There Came a Soul Called Ida



She arrived as near to virginal
as girls got in those days—i.e., young,
the requisite dewy cheek
flushed at its own daring.
He had hoped for a little more edge.
But she held the newspaper rolled like a scepter,
his advertisement turned up to prove
she was there solely at his bidding—and yet
the gold band, the photographs ... a mother, then.
He placed her in the old garden chair,
the same one he went to evenings
when the first tug on the cord sent the bulb
swinging like the lamps in the medic’s tent
over the wounded, swaddled shapes that moaned
each time the Screaming Meemies let loose,
their calculated shrieks so far away
he thought of crickets—while all around him
matted gauze and ether pricked up
an itch so bad he could hardly sketch
each clean curve of tissue opening.I shut my eyes, walk straight to it.
Nothing special but it’s there, wicker
fraying under my calming fingers.
~~~
Doors open and shut. We’ve come to the place where nothing shines. I hear eternity Is self-forgetting.  Interiors warm with the nightmare of guests and poetry And you.  Everything darkly Reverent years of reading about death eluded. Bled Back from the ear sidestepping your bullets bloom in on ye lay Rock.  Rud.  Spread So swiftly tastes like mud.  Dredged mud off The corpse sled hushed down woodsmoke. Said the stars thrum on Marie Marie.  Hold on tight. In the depths of outer space Is man.
~~~
I remember rooms that have had their part
     In the steady slowing down of the heart.
The room in Paris, the room at Geneva,
The little damp room with the seaweed smell,
And that ceaseless maddening sound of the tide—
     Rooms where for good or for ill—things died.
But there is the room where we (two) lie dead,
Though every morning we seem to wake and might just as well seem to sleep again
     As we shall somewhere in the other quieter, dustier bed
     Out there in the sun—in the rain.
~~~
We were thinking of starting a band,
all lined up like ducks in a shooting gallery.
This one would be gem, that one
metamorphic, the rest pebbles and some
laboratory-grown, semi-precious stones. The trees
were in it for the long-run; they swayed or stood
stoic, sheltered what they could. We made the cast
as an idle grouping: we played the trump, the idiot,
the glue. We backdropped with hearts hardly
beating, our eyes set straight in our heads: the bombed-
out school kids, the oilfields scrubbed in turns. We chewed
the fat amongst ourselves. You said, this place
should be more festive: a lightning bolt, a snail, a fraud. I set
a crumb aside for the local roof rat; you tallied the droppings,
the amputees, the gold. I blew my top when you lost
"Dominion." You said, what can be done? It's gone,
it's gone. Wind started in through the rift-way, buzzed
over our slate-blue bones. All the leaves have aged
with kindness, all our pretend
looped and windowed raggedness went largely
unseen. We were on stage the whole performance, held
our breath for the final moments with cheeks rent
and red. No neck was slit on our backs; no distraught
lover jumped from our cliff's edge. There was a stirring backstage
we could sense it: a temptress, some anger, some
sin. Weeds came thick around us. The act
had been bungled sorely. We withheld our opinions, sat in wait.
We were good for a throwing.
 
~~~
there are some things up there
uptown
 
I want to see
 
I want to see    I'm going to look at that and see
 
I want to go up and see
 
that show. That show
 
I went to see, I went to see.
 
There are some things up
 
there   uptown
 
I want to
 
look at that and see. I'm going to see
 
what I look. What I look at, when I look, vessel,
 
I stood to see. I went to stand to look
 
to see. Venturing further I went outside myself to look
at that wall. It fed! There was a box inside that was not blank, I saw it.
It was really different from an aura, the thing had
 
colors, the thing was talking
 
to itself. And spoke
 
to me, not incidentally.
 
~~~
The opera
In her head
Runs with no interval,
A lot of people singing tunelessly
About the same things.
An overheard
Comment like
A rotting peach.
The overzealous
Cockatoo of her impatience,
Flap flap. The slab
Of blue behind her
Is a sea of
Her doubts. The squirrel
In her stomach
Trying to get out—
They say you have to be
Twice as good. They say
There are pills
For everything now. Enamel
Eyes to see all
The better with, my
Dear. Fur coat
For your tongue—
~~~
They just can’t seem to . . . They should try harder to . . . They ought to be more . . . We all wish they weren’t so . . . They never . . . They always . . . Sometimes they . . . Once in a while they . . . However it is obvious that they . . . Their overall tendency has been . . . The consequences of which have been . . . They don’t appear to understand that . . . If only they would make an effort to . . . But we know how difficult it is for them to . . . Many of them remain unaware of . . . Some who should know better simply refuse to . . . Of course, their perspective has been limited by . . . On the other hand, they obviously feel entitled to . . . Certainly we can’t forget that they . . . Nor can it be denied that they . . . We know that this has had an enormous impact on their . . . Nevertheless their behavior strikes us as . . . Our interactions unfortunately have been . . .
~~~
I. WHAT was he doing, the great god Pan,     Down in the reeds by the river ? Spreading ruin and scattering ban, Splashing and paddling with hoofs of a goat, And breaking the golden lilies afloat     With the dragon-fly on the river. II. He tore out a reed, the great god Pan,     From the deep cool bed of the river : The limpid water turbidly ran, And the broken lilies a-dying lay, And the dragon-fly had fled away,     Ere he brought it out of the river. III. High on the shore sate the great god Pan,     While turbidly flowed the river ; And hacked and hewed as a great god can, With his hard bleak steel at the patient reed, Till there was not a sign of a leaf indeed     To prove it fresh from the river. IV. He cut it short, did the great god Pan,     (How tall it stood in the river !) Then drew the pith, like the heart of a man, Steadily from the outside ring, And notched the poor dry empty thing     In holes, as he sate by the river. V.  This is the way,' laughed the great god Pan,     Laughed while he sate by the river,)  The only way, since gods began To make sweet music, they could succeed.' Then, dropping his mouth to a hole in the reed,     He blew in power by the river. VI. Sweet, sweet, sweet, O Pan !     Piercing sweet by the river ! Blinding sweet, O great god Pan ! The sun on the hill forgot to die, And the lilies revived, and the dragon-fly     Came back to dream on the river. VII. Yet half a beast is the great god Pan,     To laugh as he sits by the river, Making a poet out of a man : The true gods sigh for the cost and pain, — For the reed which grows nevermore again     As a reed with the reeds in the river. 
~~~
Remembering the past
And gloating at it now,
I know the frozen brow
And shaking sides of lust
Will dog me at my death
To catch my ghostly breath.
 
          I think that Yeats was right,
          That lust and love are one.
          The body of this night
          May beggar me to death,
          But we are not undone
          Who love with all our breath.
 
                     I know that Proust was wrong,
                     His wheeze: love, to survive,
                     Needs jealousy, and death
                     And lust, to make it strong
                     Or goose it back alive.
                     Proust took away my breath.
 
                                 The later Yeats was right
                                 To think of sex and death
                                 And nothing else. Why wait
                                 Till we are turning old?
                                 My thoughts are hot and cold.
                                 I do not waste my breath.
~~~
Stilled as in image, at dawn sliding into blue harbor, boats clang, where does hethe man I imagine gripping several ropesreturn from. Is he conflicted, does heperceive the sky oscillating like a dimmer machine, a mouth, a war, languagenot declaring its mosteffective self, bellum grazing evernearer to beauty, a possible apotheosis how what is left of senseis comfort. Not inebriated much anymore,I rented a lawn to stand in with you, crueler was always singing to our mutual forks,knives. Our translation of a subject droneson unblinking, something black for himreturning, his forearms there laidthemselves down, ships gone out another pale-plated night.
~~~
Cherub-bee-dee how does a man
who doesn’t read English well know that cherub-bee-dum
those aren’t really words-bee-dee.
But birds.
Cherub-bee-dum, he stumbles, reading to me
by the sliding glass door cherub-bee-dee, through which I watch
my brother play in the dum-dum-yard.
Cherub-bee-dee, cherub-bee-dum, like how my father saysFine then! Leave! My mother shouts, Stupid! Dumb!
We live in a small bee-dee-nest too, one hallway to bee-dum-slam doors.
Birds? What are birds?
Thanks to my father, reading with me, I have more feathers.
T-H-E. First word he ever taught me to pluck    ...    It is a word used all the time. Cherub-cherub-bee-dum!The mail. The mailbox. The school bus. The the.
He asks me to read the mail. Not birds, mail.
If you don’t read this, you will turn into birds.
And I read it to him the best I can.
The end. A feather. Two feathers. The. The end.
Mother, mother. Repeat after me.
Cherub-bee-dee, cherub-bee-dum!
We read together before bedtime.
~~~
I dunno yer highfalutin' words, but here's th' way it seems
When I'm peekin' out th' winder o' my little House o Dreams;
I've been lookin' 'roun' this big ol' world, as bizzy as a hive,
An' I want t' tell ye, neighbor mine, it's good t' be alive.
I've ben settin' here, a-thinkin' hard, an' say, it seems t' me
That this big ol' world is jest about as good as it kin be,
With its starvin' little babies, an' its battles, an' its strikes,
An' its profiteers, an' hold-up men—th' dawggone little tykes!
An' its hungry men that fought fer us, that nobody employs.
An' I think, "Why, shucks, we're jest a lot o' grown-up little boys!"
An' I settle back, an' light my pipe, an' reach fer Mother's hand,
An' I wouldn't swap my peace o' mind fer nothin' in the land;
Fer this world uv ours, that jest was made fer folks like me an' you
Is a purty good ol' place t' live—say, neighbor, ain't it true?
~~~
Stivenson Magloire



Amidst the glossy dark green foliageof trees around the hotel pool,I spy a low-hanging golden fruit.So many trees whose names I do not knowand for the first time do not care to learn.The overwhelming now in its countless inflectionscancels vocabulary: eyes lips skininstead of words. Still in the pool,floating on my back as the sun gets low,I look at the mango, if that is what it is(I think it is some wholly other fruit),and suddenly smell garlic sautéed in butter.Chefs in the kitchen under the treesare getting the hors d’oeuvres ready.Yesterday in a dim, airless gallery,following your lead,I hunted down an iconographywritten in a grisly alphabetyet full of life, the haunting gaze direct,transcending death. Death had in winning lost.Art trumped death and life trumped art. Last night(our third together — sleepa whole new texture in a bed with you)I gave you space and found myself at the borderof a far province in the king-sized bed,a dimly lit hinterland where paintings ruled,a region wholly devoted to the workof the same painter, mysteriously killed,stoned to death (“lapidated” was one word),assassinated — why? A mysteryto be solved by iconography?Death had won but also death had lost.Garlic and butter. Glossy dark green leaves.Voices across the pool. A hanging fruit.An azure splash. And as the sun goes down,you sit by the window in our room,drawing pictures of this this this time.What to call it? Colors in your handstrump words. Like the fruit,like the solution to the mystery,something I am at a loss to name.
~~~
There is no Frigate like a Book
To take us Lands away
Nor any Coursers like a Page
Of prancing Poetry –
This Traverse may the poorest take
Without oppress of Toll –
How frugal is the Chariot
That bears the Human Soul –
~~~
“Are they real?” We have pages of kitchen utensils and books and candlesticks and nibs, but the charcoal pencil and new sketchpadare squat as aubergines in her hands in front of this display.With bad weather forecast and light silting up in cramped windows,we are the only visitors. The year settles in a corner of the room,has removed its white gloves, tip by tip, and set to one sideits summer purse of bibelots and sheen. Half-term of her final year,we are sightseers intent on moors. In the morning, her windcheaterand red wellies will bestow the dust of summer festivals uponsullen, wind-soaked sheep. We will park, and walk ourselves into the final, cutting rain between pages of her favorite book.She wants to go all the way to Top Withens, or the house they saymust have been Top Withens, given its loneliness and set. But now is artifacts and souvenirs: a perfume with too much musk in it,a jar of damson jam which we probably won’t open until pastits sell-by date. We are buying the word “damson.” And we are buyingtime. “Are they real?” she asks me, and I watch her reckon the distancebetween what should and should never be seen. We have fallen short.She draws, and what she draws is rain falling slant inside the bedroom;the bed as a box of leaves and stones and, within the display case, she hangs from the clothes rail, little moons. On the mannequin, water lilies stand in for morning dress, and the backdrop is marbled in what looks to me like veins and arteries. But when I flick through the sketchpad in the B&B, all the pages, what is left of them, are clean. Next day, she leaves it in the car. When she moves away, she will leaveit again, a sketchpad with no name on it and only the faintest traces of where she made skies of darned linen, and unfastened every stitch.
~~~
A brenda is missing—where is she?

Summon the seeds & weeds, the desert whooshes. Phone the finch

with the crowded beak;   a little pretenda

                is learning to read

in the afternoon near the cactus caves. Near oleander & pulpy

caves with the click-click of the wren & the shkrrrr of the thrasher,

               a skinny pretenda is learning

to read till the missing brenda

               is found. Drip of syllables like olives near the saguaro.

Nancy Drew will find the secret in raincoats & wednesdays

              & sticks. Nancy whose spine is yellow

              or blue will find the brenda in 1962,

 Nancy                   who has no mother,

              who takes suggestions from her father & ignores them.

 

Gleam goes the wren ignoring the thorn. They cannot tell the difference.

Click of the smart dog’s nails on linoleum.

                                 Nancy bends over the clues,

of brenda’s locket & dress. Word by word

               between syllables a clue. Where has the summer gone, the autumn—

are they missing too? Maybe Nancy

                will parse the secret & read the book report on Nancy Drew:

“neat pretty sly cute.” Syllable by syllable
                & still no brenda!   Nancy
puts her hand to her forehead; is the missing
girl in the iron bird? is the clue to the girl in the locket?
~~~
"light which is not sum" —Norma Cole, Mars



The workaround or aura
Not like repetition
 
When we get to the final sun
The maps are water the water gold
 
He would not honor me
You explain then against
 
The disbelief displayed by the character
I couldn’t know him
 
But knew love and
Know it through knowledge
 
“Love never falls off whether prophecies
will be abolished whether tongues stopped”
 
Announced as the fact
Redolent of what was
 
The defining addition
More than the parts
 
Unprecedented
Ardor also not
 
Adding up to
Sun or son to sum
 
The outcome
Unknowable
 
Perfect and
Unavowed
 
The same sound
Unknown sum
 
~~~
June Jordan, 1936-2002



I.
The city where I knew you was swift.
A lover cabbed to Brooklyn
(broke, but so what) after the night shift
in a Second Avenue
diner. The lover was a Quaker,
a poet, an anti-war
activist. Was blonde, was twenty-four.
Wet snow fell on the access
road to the Manhattan Bridge. I was
neither lover, slept uptown.
But the arteries, streetlights, headlines,
phonelines, feminine plural
links ran silver through the night city
as dawn and the yellow cab
passed on the frost-blurred bridge, headed for
that day’s last or first coffee.
The city where I knew you was rich
in bookshops, potlucks, ad hoc
debates, demos, parades and picnics.
There were walks I liked to take.
I was on good terms with two rivers.
You turned, burned, flame-wheel of words
lighting the page, good neighbor on your
homely street in Park Slope, whose
Russian zaydes, Jamaican grocers,
dyke vegetarians, young
gifted everyone, claimed some changes
—at least a new food co-op.
In the laundromat, ordinary
women talked revolution.
We knew we wouldn’t live forever
but it seemed as if we could.
The city where I knew you was yours
and mine by birthright: Harlem,
the Bronx. Separately we left it
and came separately back.
There’s no afterlife for dialogue,
divergences we never
teased apart to weave back together.
Death slams down in the midst of
all your unfinished conversations.
Whom do I address when I
address you, larger than life as you
always were, not alive now?
Words are not you, poems are not you,
ashes on the Pacific
tide, you least of all. I talk to my-
self to keep the line open.
The city where I knew you is gone.
Pink icing roses spelled out
PASSION on a book-shaped chocolate cake.
The bookshop’s a sushi bar
now, and PASSION is long out of print.
We have a Republican
mayor. Threats keep citizens in line:
anthrax; suicide attacks.
A scar festers where towers once were;
dissent festers unexpressed.
You are dead of a woman’s disease.
Who gets to choose what battle
takes her down? Down to the ocean, friends
mourn you, with no time to mourn.
II.
You, who stood alone in the tall bay window
of a Brooklyn brownstone, conjuring morning
with free-flying words, knew the power, terror
in words, in flying;
knew the high of solitude while the early
light prowled Seventh Avenue, lupine, hungry
like you, your spoils raisins and almonds, ballpoint
pen, yellow foolscap.
You, who stood alone in your courage, never
hesitant to underline the connections
(between rape, exclusion and occupation...)
and separations
were alone and were not alone when morning
blotted the last spark of you out, around you
voices you no longer had voice to answer,
eyes you were blind to.
All your loves were singular: you scorned labels.
Claimed black; woman, and for the rest eluded
limits, quicksilver (Caribbean), staked out
self-definition.
Now your death, as if it were “yours”: your house, your
dog, your friends, your son, your serial lovers.
Death’s not “yours,” what’s yours are a thousand poems
alive on paper,
in the present tense of a thousand students’
active gaze at printed pages and blank ones
which you gave permission to blacken into
outrage and passion.
You, at once an optimist, a Cassandra,
Lilith in the wilderness of her lyric,
were a black American, born in Harlem,
citizen soldier
If you had to die—and I don’t admit it—
who dared “What if, each time they kill a black man /
we kill a cop?” couldn’t you take down with you
a few prime villains
in the capitol, who are also mortal?
June, you should be living, the states are bleeding.
Leaden words like “Homeland” translate abandoned
dissident discourse.
Twenty years ago, you denounced the war crimes
still in progress now, as Jenin, Rammallah
dominate, then disappear from the headlines.
Palestine: your war.
“To each nation, its Jews,” wrote Primo Levi.
“Palestinians are Jews to Israelis.”
Afterwards, he died in despair, or so we   
infer, despairing.
Top each nation its Jews, its blacks, its Arabs,
Palestinians, immigrants, its women.
From each nation, its poets: Mahmoud Darwish,
Kavanaugh, Shahid
(who, beloved witness for silenced Kashmir,
cautioned, shift the accent, and he was “martyr”),
Audre Lorde, Neruda, Amichai, Senghor,
and you, June Jordan.
~~~
can walk without
a frame, he
whose exions last
 
and saw into
limbs livid still
the sum, comic,
 
dome-hosting wall shop
captivating everything in
a proleptic sale
 
while sand-horse negotiates
his clop versus
some floor one
 
erected in ardor
prostrate again and
happy penultimate slough-opening
 
as the news
that distracts from
spectral sass, downing
 
darkling you weren’t
personal last Saturday
as ponies cyclical
 
laced the public
grasses compulsorily before
our bower got
 
scanned despite a
standup’s lawnly heath
and harebells having
 
become grammar’s shortage
on the stage
hussing up to
 
a cardboard cloud
passed limb from
limb without its
 
                                            flame
[ardoring][clopsome][sass]
~~~
(from her to ravish meaning ravine On the other side
artifice slumbers in the green. The shadow follows hour
by hour hollow and gloomy and which call me forth)
……………………………….grafted onto the sentenceo a long time distant to hang on my belly obscure parallel
images and tattoos age suggestive of the fingernail grazing
the thigh the valley get turned on
~~~
Who wielded the chisel   at the left portal,   south porch, the scene   of Theo chained,   naked to the waist, leaning in   to the brutal hand   of what looks to be   an even younger boy?   What man carved stone   to mimic flesh   as it would look inside   the torture of its flensing?   How he must have held   the scene in his own   mind, thought it back   to the act itself,   modeling the lines   with his own limbs   so he would know   both how a body   bends in pain, and how   a hand extends the flayer’s rake.
~~~
All things belie me, I think, but I
look at them though. Well boys, at
least you’re not dead, right? What’s
the date today? Until something. What?
Of the lady of the whitening blow.
I’m ashamed to keep on babbling
as if I’ve always been oneself,
diamond flow through. Humble
flannel skeleton. Grin, laugh unbecoming
Living at the bottom of the water may
have been obvious all the time. But
I forget. What’s my plot? Hand
of a child, paw of an animal. Paint
it red & make a pawprint in the psalter.
Protect her & give her back her hat
Entangle her dreams in demotic and
Warm her feet; cheat the judge
& protect the tree from which he was carved.
                                  *
And now that I’ve explained the situation
Jesus my frame hurts, you say.
Fucking pain. Hey come & empty my ashtray
once more & don’t get so excited. A
gentle heart was broken. Whose? No one’s
It’s a figure like a frame among
medlars & briars. Hand me that piece of
that, just that, yeah. I don’t mean it,
I’ve never meant anything because that’s
not what I do, in the mountains I call home
How can I tell you of my wound? it’s
round & silver & headstrong, it’s
nothing more than temperament born
of a custom involving a circuitous journey
This is all wrong. It rains today, my
son’s singing love songs of this
country, already being ten.
                                  *
And if to withstand this nocturnal pollution of the tiny
wanton stars with bent hook clauses of misprision
I’m supposed to sing the melody of an unexpecting part. . .
Hey a pretty honey come a listen to me
while I evening, darling, your messages,
what would you think then? But I
wouldn’t do that. Light surrounded oranges
towels clouds. You don’t think you’re my you.
Not here not you. You still think you’re he. she.
Because I wouldn’t “you” you, would I? I only
“you” some other he. she. I
who write poems. When she writes them,
it’s different. . .A world of words, right?
It’s only my version of The Entertainer
Nothing truly personal, I’m way above that.
I’ve learned about it for a lot of days. I’ve
been to see the doctor & you have to have shots
for it. 17 balls of yarn & a sewing machine.
                                  *
No I wouldn’t know why anyone would
want to write like that. I should never
have had to do it. We were used to this
other thing we always know like when we’re
here. And you have this clear head & you’re
seeing things & there they are. You don’t
notice they’re spelled. That’s how you
know you’re alive. I never saw you
 
~~~
I.
And Coyote struts down East 14th
feeling good
looking good
feeling the brown
melting into the brown that loiters
rapping with the brown in front of the Native American Health Center
talking that talk
of relocation from tribal nation
of recent immigration to the place some call the United States
home to many dislocated funky brown
ironic immigration
more accurate tribal nation to tribal nation
and Coyote sprinkles corn pollen in the four directions
to thank the tribal people
          indigenous to what some call the state of California
          the city of Oakland
for allowing use of their land.
II.
And Coyote travels by Greyhound from Albuquerque, New Mexico, USA thru
Dinétah
to Oakland, California, USA
laughing
Interstate 40 is cluttered with RVs from as far away as Maine
traveling and traveling
to perpetuate the myth
Coyote kicks back for most of the ride
amused by the constant herd of tourists
amazed by the mythic Indian they create
at a pit stop in Winslow
Coyote trades a worn beaded cigarette lighter for roasted corn
from a middle-aged Navajo woman squatting
in front of a store
 
and Coyote squats alongside the woman
talking that talk
of bordertown blues
of reservation discrimination
 
blues-ing on the brown vibe
a bilagáana snaps a photo
the Navajo woman stands
holding out her hand
requesting some of her soul back
instead
she replaces her soul with a worn picture of George Washington on a dollar bill
 
and Coyote starts on another ear of corn
climbing onto the Greyhound
the woman
still squatting
waiting
tired of learning not to want
waits there for the return of all her pieces.
III.
And Coyote wanders
right into a Ponca sitting at the Fruitvale Bart station
next to the Ponca is a Seminole
Coyote struts up to the two
“Where ya’all from?”
 
the Ponca replies
“Oooklahooma”
pause
the Seminole silent watches a rush of people climb in and out of the train
headed for Fremont
the Seminole stretches his arms up and back stiff from the wooden benches
pause
he pushes his lips out toward the Ponca slowly gesturing that he too is from Oklahoma
Coyote wanders
“where ’bouts?”
 
the Ponca replies
“Ponnca City”
pause
the Seminole replies
“Seminoole”
 
Coyote gestures to the Ponca
“You Ponca?”
the Ponca nods his head in affirmation
Coyote nods his head in content
to the Seminole
Coyote asks
“You Seminole?”
pause
the Seminole now watching some kids eating frozen fruit bars
nods his head
 
and Coyote shares his smokes with the two
and ten minutes later
they travel together on the Richmond train
headed for Wednesday night dinner at the Intertribal Friendship House.
 
IV.
And Coyote blues-ing on the urban brown funk vibe
wanders
in and out of existence
tasting the brown
rusty at times
worn bitter from relocation.
~~~
               (A Pantoum)



Of making many books there is no end,    Though myriads have to deep oblivion gone; Each day new manuscripts are being penned,    And still the ceaseless tide of ink flows on. Though myriads have to deep oblivion gone,    New volumes daily issue from the press; And still the ceaseless tide of ink flows on—    The prospect is disheartening, I confess. New volumes daily issue from the press;    My pile of unread books I view aghast. The prospect is disheartening, I confess;    Why will these modern authors write so fast? My pile of unread books I view aghast—   Of course I must keep fairly up to date— Why will these modern authors write so fast?    They seem to get ahead of me of late. Of course I must keep fairly up to date;    The books of special merit I must read; They seem to get ahead of me of late,    Although I skim them very fast indeed. The books of special merit I must read;    And then the magazines come round again; Although I skim them very fast indeed,    I can’t get through with more than eight or ten. And then the magazines come round again!    How can we stem this tide of printer’s ink? I can’t get through with more than eight or ten—    It is appalling when I stop to think. How can we stem this tide of printer’s ink?    Of making many books there is no end. It is appalling when I stop to think    Each day new manuscripts are being penned!
~~~
The Normal Monster
sings in the Green Sahara
 
The voice and offal
of the image of God
 
make Celtic noises
in these lyrical hells
 
Hurricanes
of reasoned musics
reap the uncensored earth
 
The loquent consciousness
of living things
pours in torrential languages
 
The elderly colloquists
the Spirit and the Flesh
are out of tongue
 
The Spirit
is impaled upon the phallus
 
Phoenix
of Irish fires
lighten the Occident
 
with Ireland's wings
flap pandemoniums
of Olympian prose
 
and satinize
the imperial Rose
of Gaelic perfumes —
England
the sadistic mother
embraces Erin
 
Master
of meteoric idiom
present
 
The word made flesh
and feeding upon itself
with erudite fangs
The sanguine
introspection of the womb
 
Don Juan
of Judea
upon a pilgrimage
to the Libido
 
The press
purring
its lullabies to sanity
 
Christ capitalized
scourging
incontrite usurers of destiny
in hole and corner temples
 
And hang
The soul's advertisements
outside the ecclesiast's Zoo
 
A gravid day
spawns
gutteral gargoyles
upon the Tower of Babel
 
Empyrean emporium
where the
rejector-recreator
Joyce
flashes the giant reflector
on the sub rosa
 
~~~
Camille Corot's painting, stolen from the Louvre, May 1998



It might have always been meant  that they walked completely away,  this man on horse, woman with basket.  With their backs to us and the painter,  they are so private. But like those stories  where children step right into a picture  and, looking over their shoulders,  see the consoling frame,  these two would know the way home  like the palms of their hands, the routine  so ordinary it most encloses,  no need for thought, only motion  and the full sensation of sun  on your flesh, along the usual road.
~~~
After Erik Satie



For an hour I forgot my fat self, my neurotic innards, my addiction to alignment.For an hour I forgot my fear of rain.For an hour I was a salamandershimmying through the kelp in search of shore,and under his fingers the notes slid loosefrom my belly in a long jellyrope of eggsthat took root in the mud. And whatwould hatch, I did not know—a lie. A waltz. An apostle of glass.For an hour I stood on two legs and ran. For an hour I panted and galloped.For an hour I was a maple tree,and under the summer of his fingers the notes seeded and winged away 
~~~
The music was already turning sad,
      those fresh-faced voices singing in a round
            the lie that time could set its needle back
and play from the beginning. Had you lived
      to eighty, as you’d wished, who knows?—you might
            have broken from the circle of that past
more ours than yours. Never even sure
      which was the truest color for your hair
            (it changed with each photographer), we claimed
you for ourselves; called you John and named
      the day you left us (spun out like a reel—
            the last broadcast to prove you’d lived at all)
an end to hope itself. It isn’t true,
      and worse, does you no justice if we call
            your death the death of anything but you.
II
It put you in the headlines once again:
      years after you’d left the band, you joined
            another—of those whose lives, in breaking, link
all memory with their end. The studio
      of history can tamper with you now,
            as if there’d always been a single track
chance traveled on, and your discordant voice
      had led us to the final violence.
            Yet like the times when I, a star-crossed fan,
had catalogued your favorite foods, your views
      on monarchy and war, and gaily clipped
            your quips and daily antics from the news,
I keep a loving record of your death.
      All the evidence is in—of what,
            and to what end, it’s hard to figure out,
riddles you might have beat into a song.
      A younger face of yours, a cover shot,
            peered from all the newsstands as if proof
of some noteworthy thing you’d newly done.
~~~
Soul, don’t complain, says Senhal,
who means by “soul” a thing like “future,”
possesses without knowing it
not soul, but future,
is little present, Senhal, & less past
when this she shares,
not always willing all,
the pale pearl earth with you
& shelters in her heart
a stunted lemon tree, inviolate,
& shielded by a sour ring of fire,
the kind that keeps a Valkyrie asleep.
Always born too early,
Senhal lights these candles
not to read by, but to watch
the diamonds flower & die
within their hot, blue nuclei,
which seem to flicker
with secret intent
that fails, all told,
to comprehend her.
& arguably, this darkness is, for her, the best
of them, refusal of the soul
she never recognizes
as refusal of the future
which she is
instead of all her otherwises — 
& might she have been — 
conscience-calmed — perhaps — 
or else a bird
of the earthly paradise
in which one barely needs to eat
or else subsists on manna
or some other fragrant zero
denuded of the tang of death
& the numb green shade,
a starry zone,
orthogonal with luminous errata,
in which a lake of ultramarine
has been used with never parsimony
in all the places where blue is required
to smudge a Thule out
of sand & sea & air,
a seeming there
that seeming wants
to hold her in its arms,
in which one could be one
& yes the ripe quicksilver
that the artificer poured
into the throats of statues
to give them voice
had never brought the air alive
with hoarsest cries & muffled pleas
(lutes, lobsters, seas of milk, and ships of amber
did they cry?)
as if nor it nor any thing mercurial had ever learned
to savor love & poison in one mouth?
~~~
The streets of Shobra are still traced
with music from years ago—
children ripping
the clothes off lines,
pins scattering in a rounded clatter
of sharp-throated wooden notes.
It might have been a merging
of Mohamed Fouad
and Mohamed Mohy
or Mohamed Fawzi,
and my brother (also a Mohamed)
is sitting in the shimmering corner
of our grandma’s balcony with one leg up.
He wants to finish this one song
because it has his favorite parts,
which he has rewound a few times now,
and Mahmoud is downstairs again
yelling, holding a peeling board game
they taped together, and my brother’s eyes glint
over to the chorus, remembering how Mahmoud
once told him how his father comes home
only once a month, and he feels bad
he is taking so long to go downstairs
but this would be the last time
he rewinds the song, Mahmoud, wallahi,
he yells, the cassette player’s volume
on high but not loud enough
to drown out the street-market prices,
the chatter of bent men
at the coffeehouse, their fingers caterpillar-like
through the mugs, blowing
on clouded tea,
but the music is just enough
to shroud it all in the blur
of a filmy fog that Mahmoud can hear
and he can’t help but remember
how sometimes at night,
if he closes his eyes hard enough,
he hears the din of keys
against the door,
the whistling of a man
nearly always caught
in the middle
of an unfinished song.
~~~
(From a Persian Carpet)



Ash and strewments, the first moth-wings, pale
Ardour of brief evenings, on the fecund wind;
Or all a wing, less than wind,
Breath of low herbs upfloats, petal or wing,
Haunting the musk precincts of burial.
For the season of newer riches moves triumphing,
Of the evanescence of deaths. These potpourris
Earth-tinctured, jet insect-bead, cinder of bloom—
How weigh while a great summer knows increase,
Ceaselessly risen, what there entombs?—
Of candour fallen from the slight stems of Mays,
Corrupt of the rim a blue shades, pensively:
So a fatigue of wishes will young eyes.
And brightened, unpurged eyes of revery, now
Not to glance to fabulous groves again!
For now deep presence is, and binds its close,
And closes down the wreathed alleys escape of sighs.
And now rich time is weaving, hidden tree,
The fable of orient threads from bough to bough.
Old rinded wood, whose lissomeness within
Has reached from nothing to its covering
These many corymbs’ flourish!—And the green
Shells which wait amber, breathing, wrought
Towards the still trance of summer’s centering,
Motives by ravished humble fingers set,
Each in a noon of its own infinite.
And here is leant the branch and its repose
of the deep leaf to the pilgrim plume. Repose,
Inflections brilliant and mute of the voyager, light!
And here the nests, and freshet throats resume
Notes over and over found, names
For the silvery ascensions of joy. Nothing is here
But moss and its bells now of the root’s night;
But the beetle’s bower, and arc from grass to grass
For the flight in gauze. Now its fresh lair,
Grass-deep, nestles the cool eft to stir
Vague newborn limbs, and the bud’s dark winding has
Access of day. Now on the subtle noon
Time’s image, at pause with being, labours free
Of all its charge, for each in coverts laid,
Of clement kind; and everlastingly,
In some elision of bright moments is known,
Changed wide as Eden, the branch whose silence sways
Dazzle of the murmurous leaves to continual tone;
Its separations, sighing to own again
Being of the ignorant wish; and sways to sight,
Waked from it nighted, the marvelous foundlings of light;
Risen and weaving from the ceaseless root
A divine ease whispers toward fruitfulness,
While all a summer’s conscience tempts the fruit.
~~~
This is not a book. Otherwise, by now
We would love each other.
You would not put me first,
Out of a kind habit, under your coat
And clutch—as a sudden rain
Spate down. For I've seen it done
For the hardly known.
No, you would know with a book you love:
How nothing held your eyes
The way the words did, with archer-focus:
How each arrow heading toward you
Was slowed by the dripping beehive
On its spike—
Nothing else could hold what you are
Still: I pressed your heart in speech and saw
What a musical you let rush, nothing
Else in the eyes. This is not a book,
But a streak—
Words cross reins—
The brow splits, veins careen.
~~~
There were words I had to leave behind,
moonlight, backward ponies.
Leaving flowers out seemed safest.
Trying for something surreal,
A trouble free rise of smoke and lavender.
No not lavender. Any shade
of purple is best left alone.
Perhaps a jaundiced smoke
rising in my poetry
would be best, although I like violet haze.
Many a summer morning,
while other folks are
eating bagels, lox,
cinnamon rolls,
I rummage through old cider houses,
find words like obdurate,
bipolar, manic, cold heeled.
But writing about love, well,
not even searches to junkyards
as far away as Peking
turn up the slightest unused vowel.
So, I make words up, create my own language.
You Chinese me in the roofy mornings.
You Japanese my legs in the spidery evenings.
Our children are the leggy offspring
of centipede afternoons. Our bedroom
is the Acropolis. You temple me backward.
I could bless you all the way to shadowland.
If we were not already steepled there,
our undergarments ruffianed off onto chairs.
You catapulted silence,
dogkissed, catlicked my paws
held my squeaks and rattles.
Where the rest had said, What’s this?
You said, it’s mine.
~~~
I want to believe we can’t see anything
we don’t have a word for.
 
When I look out the window and say green, I mean sea green,
I mean moss green, I mean gray, I mean pale and also
electrically flecked with white and I mean green
in its damp way of glowing off a leaf.
 
Scheele’s green, the green of Renaissance painters,
is a sodium carbonate solution heated to ninety degrees
as arsenious oxide is stirred in. Sodium displaces copper,
resulting in a green precipitate that is sometimes used
as insecticide. When I say green I mean
a shiny green bug eating a yellow leaf.
 
Before synthetics, not every painter could afford a swathe
of blue. Shocking pink, aka neon, aka kinky pink,
wasn’t even on the market. I want to believe Andy Warhol
invented it in 1967 and ever since no one’s eyes
have been the same. There were sunsets before,
but without that hot shocking neon Marilyn, a desert sky
was just cataract smears. I want to believe this.
 
The pale green of lichen and half-finished leaves
filling my window is a palette very far from carnation
or bougainvillea, but to look out is to understand it is not,
is to understand what it is not. I stare out the window a lot.
Between the beginning and the end the leaves unfolded.
I looked out one morning and everything was unfamiliar
as if I was looking at the green you could only see
if you’d never known synthetic colors existed.
 
I’ve drawn into myself people say.
We understand, they say.
 
There are people who only have words for red
and black and white, and I wonder if they even see
the trees at the edge of the grass
or the green storms coming out of the west.
There are people who use the same word for green
and red and brown, and I wonder if red
seems so urgently bright pouring from the body
when there is no green for it to fall against.
 
In his treatise on color Wittgenstein asked,
“Can’t we imagine certain people
having a different geometry of colour than we do?”
 
I want to believe the eye doesn’t see green until it has a name,
because I don’t want anything to look the way it did before.
 
Van Gogh painted pink flowers, but the pink faded
and curators labeled the work “White Roses” by mistake.
 
The world in my window is a color the Greeks called chlorol.
When I learned the word I was newly pregnant
and the first pale lichens had just speckled the silver branches.
The pines and the lichens in the chill drizzle were glowing green
and a book in my lap said chlorol was one of the untranslatable
words. The vibrating glow pleased me then, as a finger
dipped in sugar pleased me then. I said the word aloud
for the baby to hear. Chlorol. I imagined the baby
could only see hot pink and crimson inside its tiny universe,
but if you can see what I’m seeing, the word for it
is chlorol. It’s one of the things you’ll like out here.
 
Nineteenth century critics mocked painters who cast shadows
in unexpected colors. After noticing green cypresses do drop red
shadows, Goethe chastised them. “The eye demands
completeness and seeks to eke out the colorific circle in itself.”
He tells of a trick of light that had him pacing a row of poppies
to see the flaming petals again and figure out why.
 
Over and over again Wittgenstein frets the problem of translucence.
Why is there no clear white?
He wants to see the world through white-tinted glasses,
but all he finds is mist.
 
At first I felt as if the baby had fallen away
like a blue shadow on the snow.
 
Then I felt like I killed the baby
in the way you can be thinking about something else
and drop a heavy platter by mistake.
 
Sometimes I feel like I was stupid
to have thought I was pregnant at all.
 
Color is an illusion, a response to the vibrating universe
of electrons. Light strikes a leaf and there’s an explosion
where it lands. When colors change, electromagnetic fields
are colliding. The wind is not the only thing moving the trees.
 
Once when I went into those woods I saw a single hot pink orchid
on the hillside and I had to keep reminding myself not to
tell the baby about the beautiful small things I was seeing.
So, hot pink has been here forever and I don’t even care
about that color or how Andy Warhol showed me an orchid.
I hate pink. It makes my eyes burn.
~~~
You change a life
as eating an artichoke changes the taste
of whatever is eaten after.
Yet you are not an artichoke, not a piano or cat—
not objectively present at all—
and what of you a cat possesses is essential but narrow:
to know if the distance between two things can be leapt.
The piano, that good servant,
has none of you in her at all, she lends herself
to what asks; this has been my ambition as well.
Yet a person who has you is like an iron spigot
whose water comes from far-off mountain springs.
Inexhaustible, your confident pronouncements flow,
coldly delicious.
For if judgment hurts the teeth, it doesn’t mind,
not judgment. Teeth pass. Pain passes.
Judgment decrees what remains—
the serene judgments of evolution or the judgment
of a boy-king entering Persia: “Burn it,” he says,
and it burns. And if a small tear swells the corner
of one eye, it is only the smoke, it is no more to him than a beetle
fleeing the flames of the village with her six-legged children.
The biologist Haldane—in one of his tenderer moments—
judged beetles especially loved by God,
“because He had made so many.” For judgment can be tender:
I have seen you carry a fate to its end as softly as a retriever
carries the quail. Yet however much
I admire you at such moments, I cannot love you:
you are too much in me, weighing without pity your own worth.
When I have erased you from me entirely,
disrobed of your measuring adjectives,
stripped from my shoulders and hips each of your nouns,
when the world is horsefly, coal barge, and dawn the color of winter butter—
not beautiful, not cold, only the color of butter—
then perhaps I will love you. Helpless to not.
As a newborn wolf is helpless: no choice but hunt the wolf milk,
find it sweet.
~~~
The song is Gaelic now,
peridot words
the color of fresh
timothy gathered
by red-haired women;
or the song
is the bony white oak
and rhythm of Miwu,
a knowing that breathes
against angles of granite
and meets the ground
in a flurry of sound.
Or the song rides down from a star
over burgundy boulders
beneath a dazzling blue sky
to find the old words
buried deep in the earth.
But this heart listens.
This song. Hi-tsah-tsi-nah,
the precious rain awakening.
On this you come
as a prayer in the flesh,
on this you ride
with the roll and rollick
of rattlesnake.
On this you sing
volcanic birthing words
and obsidian cools where
the blood bubbles down.
          Oh look, a little girl is lost
          although she stands close
          to her mother’s heart.
          With great energy she scrapes
          the missionaries from her ribs.
          Shoulder blades curve
          around the spine
          and the pestle dances,
          acorns flying,
          and dust collects
          in the creases
          of her hands. Or
     she is kneeling in a small room
     at the edge of the mesa,
     polished black bone of earth,
     cherished piki stone,
     moving back and forth
     this act of love, grinding
     the corn until it is dark,
     brushing the white cornmeal
     into one basket, the blue
     into another, thinking already
     of the daughters she will bear
     glowing in the sun.
Or she is standing at the bog
inside a mountain meadow,
hands raised up to tie back her hair
with a thin red rag; seeds loosen
and cling to her shoes, her stockings,
her long skirt, her skin.
She fearlessly walks
through gold fiddleneck,
small mountain lupines, clouds
of white popcorn flowers fallen upward
out of the ground
to cover the hillside
like snow. Or
          a woman gathers loop after loop
          of heavy rope to guide the head
          of the horse she straddles and sometimes
          she is the mare and the soft sandstone
          and the hot rocks rolling in acorn soup,
          trying to heal the gash spread across her path
          where the crescent moon has sliced the earth.
          Ocean to mountain to mesa, the bundle she carries
          is a sacred memory, a rainbow that arches
          from one side of the sky to the other.
Or a woman is closing
a steamer trunk, has to sit on it hard
to get the latch through and
the leather buckled; seagulls dive
outside the wall of the ship, she
hears their demands, maybe one
has come inside to brush her cheek
with its pointed wing or maybe
just another tear warmed by cooling blood.
How she aches in the cold, she is so thin;
and when she pulls the blanket around her
and lies down on the floor, she is no more
than a pile of old rags, a few sticks of firewood,
a broken broom. Steady against the roll of the sea
she is patient as the rocks that wait for the ship
along a northern corridor, angry as the storms
midway across the Atlantic that shake their fists
at those who must leave home, and as deeply hidden
as the icebergs that threaten to disembowl.
She has already seen the world dissolve;
now she feels the breaking
of one last thread
to ancestral land,
feels the very break
of it.
~~~
 

Granite Weaving, 1988, by Jesús Moroles 
To climb, in this instance, upon a horizon
Shadow-shadow. Lip-to-lip rock.
Ziggurat. Ah, from the base to the top.
Sideways. Upwards. Again, in succession.
Sprung and sprung
Frozen idiom.
Barre. Pietrasanta. Mouth and mouth.
Sung. Granite. Stitching
The way fabric gathers — pinch, scrunch.
Not in dreams alone. Not the knot.
Step, step, step, step, step. 35 up.
As if into clouds
Ur, Aqar Quf, Chogha Zanbil, Tikal.
Kin.
Plank upon plank upon plank upon
Little Blocks: ahem. don’t you forget us.a, of, or, but, if, la, and
Close and closer to flattened.
Rock, Water, Bone: Noisy Pilgrim.
~~~
            Oh, dangling long sleeves in the Mercurochrome.
            Parking her punch on her knees.
 
     I’m not a joiner.
 
            In the night, a visitation, small as a thumb,
            enters the sealed house and ascends.
 
     Mother wouldn’t have stood for that long. Drippy-drooping around
on heels. Leaving the blue cheese out.
~~~
You’re like
a little fruit
you’re like
a moon I want
to hold
I said lemon slope
about your
hip
because it’s one
of my words
about you
I whispered
in bed
this smoothing
the fruit &
then alone
with my book
but writing
in it the pages
wagging
against my knuckles
in the
light like a
sail.
~~~
There’s a spirit in me that admits no weakness.
Is it the best of me or worst?
Cow daisies burn their stars into the stalled air of pastures.
No one else cares whether they’ll last.
I shirk the sick and go out to pick flowers,
Bushels of the tough and prickly-legged,
Whichever I can pull out of the gulch,
And push them into thunder-pitchers.
An invalid in a peignoir pulls the covers over her head
In the high cherry bed great-grandmother had made
To match the chest of drawers.
Solitudes gather under the Beau D’arc.
I ache for the meanness, the glorious meanness
That knocked croquet balls into its soft meal trunk,
To hear the thwack of that mallet,
To be it, as it cleanly cracks and lets the other ball be gone.
Acquisitive gall made my people call themselves victorious.
They thought they won the Mexican War, among others.
One ancestor drove his bayonet into the dirt when he returned — 
This tree is what took root and bloomed,
Though Beau D’arcs grow complex in illness.
The locusts have chewed its thatch into fretwork,
Its leaves fluted crisp, poxed yellowish, kissed by the worm.
Huptemugs believed that train rides to the capital to hear
Charlemagne singing Franz would cure the soul
(As venison is cured) against life’s turmoil — 
They could not tolerate complaints of the feet,
Corns and hammertoes, evidence of rot.
If generous you might have called us committed to transcendence,
Though who that ever fought her way into an opera box
Ever let the arias consign her to a fate of constant care?
There is a spirit in me that admits no weakness.
When it sings, the rest of me despairs.
~~~
Dr. L. H. Pammel



Hybridization, cross-breeding, evolution:
He takes to new theories
like a puppy takes to ice cream.
We whisper that our Green-Thumb Boy
is the black Mendel, that Darwin
would have made good use of Carver's eyes.
So clear his gift for observation:
the best collector I've ever known.
I think we have an entirely new species
of Pseudocercospora.
And always in his threadbare lapel
a flower. Even in January.
I've never asked how.
We had doubts
about giving him a class to teach,
but he's done a bang-up job
with the greenhouse. His students
see the light of genius
through the dusky window of his skin.
Just yesterday, that new boy,
what's-his-name, from Arkansas,
tried to raise a ruckus when Carver
put his dinner tray down.
He cleared his throat, stared, rattled
his own tray, scraped his chair legs
in a rush to move away. Carver
ate on in silence. Then the boys
at the table the new boy had moved to
cleared their throats, rattled their trays
and scraped their chair legs as they got up
and moved to Carver's table.
Something about the
man does that, raises the best
in you. I've never asked what.
I guess I'll put his name next to mine
on that article I'm sending out.
~~~
It’s a spring morning; sun pours in the window
As I sit here drinking coffee, reading Augustine.
And finding him, as always, newly minted
From when I first encountered him in school.
Today I’m overcome with astonishment
At the way we girls denied all that was mean
In those revered philosophers we studied;
Who found us loathsome, loathsomely seductive;
Irrelevant, at best, to noble discourse
Among the sex, the only sex that counted.
Wounded, we pretended not to mind it
And wore tight sweaters to tease our shy professor.
We sat in autumn sunshine “as the clouds arose
From slimy desires of the flesh, and from
Youth’s seething spring.” Thank you, Augustine.
Attempting to seem blasé, our cheeks on fire,
It didn’t occur to us to rush from the room.
Instead we brushed aside “the briars of unclean desire”
And struggled on through mires of misogyny
Till we arrived at Kierkegaard, and began to see
That though Saint A. and Søren had much in common
Including fear and trembling before women,
The Saint scared himself, while Søren was scared of us.
Had we, poor girls, been flattered by their thralldom?
Yes, it was always us, the rejected feminine
From whom temptation came. It was our flesh
With its deadly sweetness that led them on.
Yet how could we not treasure Augustine,
“Stuck fast in the bird-lime of pleasure”?
That roomful of adolescent poets manqué
Assuaged, bemused by music, let the meaning go.
Swept by those psalmic cadences, we were seduced!
Some of us tried for a while to be well-trained souls
And pious seekers, enmeshed in the Saint’s dialectic:Responsible for our actions, yet utterly helpless.
A sensible girl would have barked like a dog before God.
We students, children still, were shocked to learn
The children these men desired were younger than we!
Augustine fancied a girl about eleven,
The age of Adeodatus, Augustine’s son.
Søren, like Poe, eyed his girl before she was sixteen,
To impose his will on a malleable child, when
She was not equipped to withstand or understand him.
Ah, the Pygmalion instinct! Mold the clay!
Create the compliant doll that can only obey,
Expecting to be abandoned, minute by minute.
It was then I abandoned philosophy,
A minor loss, although I majored in it.
But we were a group of sunny innocents.
I don’t believe we knew what evil meant.
Now I live with a well-trained soul who deals with evil,
Including error, material or spiritual,
Easily, like changing a lock on the kitchen door.
He prays at set times and in chosen places
(At meals, in church), while I
Pray without thinking how or when to pray,
In a low mumble, several times a day,
Like running a continuous low fever;
The sexual impulse for the most part being over.
Believing I believe. Not banking on it ever.
It’s afternoon. I sit here drinking kir
And reading Kierkegaard: “All sin begins with fear.”
(True. We lie first from terror of our parents.)
In, I believe, an oblique crack at Augustine,
Søren said by denying the erotic
It was brought to the attention of the world.
The rainbow curtain rises on the sensual:
Christians must admit it before they can deny it.
He reflected on his father’s fierce repression
Of the sexual, which had bent him out of shape;
Yet he had to pay obeisance to that power:
He chose his father when he broke with his Regina.Søren said by denying the erotic
It is brought to the attention of the world.
You must admit it before you can deny it.
~~~
Crumbling is not an instant's Act
A fundamental pause
Dilapidation's processes
Are organized Decays —
'Tis first a Cobweb on the Soul
A Cuticle of Dust
A Borer in the Axis
An Elemental Rust —
Ruin is formal — Devil's work
Consecutive and slow —
Fail in an instant, no man did
Slipping — is Crashe's law —
~~~
in the blackest recesses of Bistro Malatesta entre les heures du quatre à cinq
(forgoing his liaison with Odette for the third time in as many days) Prudhomme
observes a snailfish
undulating round the hat stand’s spine, the stalagmites of candles (its sad, small
eyes, its cryptic lack of scales)
wants to cleave to it
wants to shake the dipsomaniac in the corner, hiss Ay caramba! Have you seen it?Here on the Rue Mouffetard — so far from deep-sea canyons, so far from home?
considers eating it flavored with rosemary, flavored with dill
whiskery thing
sees it, loses it in Gauloise furls, catches it again, its curl/uncurl progression along a
velveteen banquette
it stirs him — its decision in oblivion to be a thing of  light and so gelatinous
thinks of turtles nibbled at by surgeonfish
wonders if perhaps he’s lost his grip, and if  he has,
likes it
~~~
I
A cave with arms at the mouth.
Our hero is blind: everything he hears he sees.
Hear! Gold light sifts to his ear.
A roar. The seas
beaten—his duodenum, colon,
blind intestine and appendix, destined
for heat, they blush.
II
William's cabbage heart shook.
He dragged himself from the dirt.
If he could rest his ears he could see
ginkgos in his city. The pretty boy I mean
& Will, who were both aging
with their senses curbed until they knew
New York City by the root & crack.
III
As if there is a fig tree rooted in heaven
& each of its leaves knows all the rules.
8:45 a.m. hum: he saw the boy had fallen
into a manhole & the fig tree had fallen into a manhole
& neither could be the sound of hands splitting
gold hands landed
up the breadth of William's back.
            God bleeding me a kind of blooded cry
            my lady makes me a heron
            or my leg for a stump
            the cursed in loam my
            venomous thumbs my
His guts an a-readied muck.
IV
If your hand had been dusk-
yellow not a lantern but winged
—a bridge or a dove sprung
from the dirt.
Trying to make a shape. The feathered
thumb herring—
bone. We would not fall.
V
I brought you in from the garden since I can't
stand the trees' visions. William you will
be there the last
stately in ribbons.
But the vision is a fattened glee.
The glee is a clubfoot.
The glee is a mutt.
The eyes sewn up the air & nothing can be seen
but visions.
You are burst sideways like a fist in water.
Your maker staring into an apron of mud.
Thou art
           bore a hole in the man.
Thou art
           not a bloody bit, not the man.
 
~~~
Methought a sweet sound from the street uprose,—       And as I pause, and strive again to hear, ‘St Patrick’s Day’ draws softly to its close,    And ‘Jordan’s’ waves flow sweetly to my ear, What though from humble source the chorus floats?    Music is music, and I listen still; I have ‘an ear’, — ay, two! — Even jews-harp notes    Pass current with me, hear them where I will, A slight Italian boy, with jetty hair    Shading dark eyes, grinds out the melody, Pulverized music! — In his garb and air    I read of sunnier lands beyond the sea, And, dreaming, wander to a fairer clime, Recalled, too suddenly, by — ‘If you please, a dime!’
~~~
To be a statue               carved by Bernini
Lounging in a climate-controlled museum in Rome         is luxury
Like the luxury of a personal pan pizza            with unlimited free toppings
Or the luxurious feel of a premium eye pencil          used to draw bisons on the walls of a French cave
To be so white and glossy                   is unimaginable
Like how I imagine a plate of eggs painted by Velázquez           or the lid of a designer toilet cistern
In a European magazine                       (I could be European
And wear a dashingly arranged scarf          or sip weirdly-named liqueurs that taste like semen
In a Rococo palais)                but in the scheme of things
Where I am marble and still                  my wrist will be a marvel
Like the marvel of an isthmus           whose name can only be pronounced if you have a lisp
Or the marvelous sausage                that saved a man from the Inquisition in 1582
It is definitely marvelous                    to be as attenuated
As the casually extended leg of a greyhound                   reclining on its very own velvet settee
To be so thoroughbred                          is an accomplishment
Like the thoroughly flattened face of a Persian cat                   which always looks peevish
Or the extremely frivolous ceiling                   of a banqueting hall where royals are put to death
If it is admirable to be so luxurious                    then I will never be admired
The way a designer toilet cistern is admired               or a piece of elaborate pâtisserie
(Although I am not a statue                   I have often held my arms aloft
As when catching a carelessly thrown baby              or pointing at two meteors at the same time)
It is exhausting trying to be so inanimate               and desirable
If my arm breaks off  like the shell                of a freshly-filled cannoli
You will know why
~~~
Poet— Enchanting spirit!—at thy votive shrine I lowly bend a simple wreath to twine; O Come from the ideal world and fling Thy airy fingers o’er my rugged string; Sweep the dark chords of thought and give to earth The thrilling song that tells thy heavenly birth— Fancy— Happiness when from earth she fled       I passed on her heavenward flight— “Take this crown,” the spirit said       “Of heaven’s own golden light— To the sons of sorrow the token give, And bid them follow my steps and live!”— I took the crown from the snowy hand,       It flashed like a living star; I turned this dark earth to a fairy land       When I hither drive my car; But I placed the crown round my tresses bright, And man only saw its reflected light— Many a lovely dream I’ve given,       And many a song divine; But never!—oh never—that gift of heaven       Shall mortals temples twine— Hope and love in the circlet glow! ’Tis all too bright for a world of woe— Poet— Hist—Beautiful spirit!—why silent so soon? My ear drinks each word of thy magical tune; My lyre owns thy touch—and its tremulous strings Vibrate beneath the soft play of thy wings; Resume thy sweet lay, and reveal, ere we part Thy home lovely spirit—and say what thou art?”— Fancy— The gleam of a star thou cans’t not see— Of an eye ’neath its sleeping lid, The sound of a far off melody       The voice of a stream that’s hid; Such must I still remain to thee A wonder and a mystery!— I live in the poet’s dream       I flash on the painter’s eye; I dwell in the moon’s pale beam,       In the depths of the star lit sky; I traverse the earth, the air, the main, And bind young hearts in my magic chain— I float on the fleecy cloud       My voice is in ev’ry breeze; I speak in the tempest loud,       In the sigh of the waving trees— To the sons of earth—in a mystic tone, I tell of a world more bright than their own!—
~~~
How much greener is paint than grass, especially in winter.
~~~
As if because you lay(deeply embarrassing) inside
my body, I could (inconceivable)
follow your swift thoughts into their blue   
immersion even now,
stilettoes flickering, or schools of fish
maneuvering, first clear and then occluded,
though now and then a piercing gleam cuts through;
as if the snow reflections that glaze   
the winter afternoon to porcelain
could penetrate the secrets of a skull
that happens to have lodged (improbable)
inside me once. Your liberation
twelve years ago today is the occasion   
you and your friends are celebrating now   
behind a door that’s firmly shut.
The fantasy you’ve lately been devouring   
features an evil mage with hourglass eyes.   
Last week, when you were furious at me
(I must have thrown some precious thing away),   
you swiftly slipped into your parents’ room   
and turned the bedside clock an hour ahead.   
Discovered as the culprit, wickedly
you smiled. You knew time was my enemy.
~~~
Kills bugs dead. Redundancy is syntactical overkill. A pin-prick of peace at the end of the tunnel of a nightmare night in a roach motel. Their noise infects the dream. In black kitchens they foul the food, walk on our bodies as we sleep over oceans of pirate flags. Skull and crossbones, they crunch like candy. When we die they will eat us, unless we kill them first. Invest in better mousetraps. Take no prisoners on board ship, to rock the boat, to violate our beds with pestilence. We dream the dream of extirpation. Wipe out a species, with God at our side. Annihilate the insects. Sterilize the filthy vermin.
~~~
Does not mean silence. The absence of moon in the day sky for example. Does not mean barely to speak, the way a child's whisper makes only warm air on his mother's right ear. To play pianissimo is to carry sweet words to the old woman in the last dark row who cannot hear anything else, and to lay them across her lap like a shawl.
~~~
Publication – is the Auction
Of the Mind of Man –
Poverty – be justifying
For so foul a thing
Possibly – but We – would rather
From Our Garret go
White – unto the White Creator –
Than invest – Our Snow –
Thought belong to Him who gave it –
Then – to Him Who bear
It's Corporeal illustration – sell
The Royal Air –
In the Parcel – Be the Merchant
Of the Heavenly Grace –
But reduce no Human Spirit
To Disgrace of Price –
~~~
This song is not a language,
Not a thing to be remembered,
The field-holler tradition of
Teeth and knees
Cursing wind,
A concert hall of   bloody hands
Spilling the earth,
Strangling dirt,
Sledgehammer curses
Of  men busted open.
On Parchman Farm
You could hear it coming
Up through the trees,
The hammering pulpit of
Crooning men and sweat,
The tender meat of palms
Pulped like plums.
Them men gulped down the
Dawn dew air,
Let it catch in their throats,
Broke the sunrise up and
Sang hymns like hexes:Be my woman gal, I’ll beeee your maaaaaaan    ...    
And the killing fields of  Mississippi
Fizzled down to juke joints and
The hothouse music of illegal clubs
With thick women they loved outright and
Played cards with and
Gave bourbon to when their hands
Didn’t hold sorrow like
Pickaxes and the railroad was
Just a railroad,
A way to ride north if  you could
Get your money right.
Redbone gals with rosewater sweat,
When they lifted their knees
Sunflower County was a heaven
They believed in.Stick to the promise, gal, that you maaaaaade meeeeee    ...    
Steady now,
They turned back the clock on
Their hard, hard hands,
Let the memory of fresh linen and
Ladies’ slips like gossamer
Wings, a parade of  plump thighs,
The juju thrust of  furious bones
Spread like grease
Across starched-white sheets,
Midwife them out of ol’ Parchman Farm
And back to the cockfights and gambling,
Back when they had ambition,
Back when they had a sweet woman
To hold, her fat wrists
Soft as butter,
Limp as rain.When she walk, she reel and rock beeeeeehind
Ain’t that enough to make a convict smiiiiiiiiile.
~~~
The brook is this mix of roar & hiss as if Godhas managed to scalpel a section of tempest & clothespin it inthe woods Over There Always draped in the treeswhile we eat white summer peaches from celadon bowlswhile the sun bleaches & blue jay squawks score the maple, oakbirch and apple-treed sky with their oblique Scriabin musics.Fifteen years since I have seen a real Fallher deciduous burlesque, her glistering things siftingon the old cider mill. A holy show.I hold a wooden fragrance & a sodden mush of crushedflowing apples in a cache and will never give it up.The cardinal is the best bird because it is a red markon the blank snow amid the charcoal Twombly of maple, oakbirch and apple branches. Pines are green & faraway, don’t figure.My sister in spring is even prettier, her smilethe genuine quality of it undiminished in the many monthssince I have been in Happy Valley. It roars and is constantlyin spate because it has its reasons spring being spring plus my visiting.
~~~
“I fucked up bad”: Justin cracks his neck,talking to nobody. Fifteen responsible children,final semester college seniors, bloodshot,collars undone, gorgeously exhausted, return from Wall Street interviews in attitudes of surrender on the Dinky—the one-car commuter train connecting Princeton to the New York line. Panic-sweat sheens their faces. Justin hasn’t seen me yet. “Something’s fucked with my tie.” He’s right. I see his future, the weight he’ll gain first in his face, then gut and ass, the look of bad luck he’ll haunt his bad jobs with. He tears off the tie. Elephants on it. Fatigue, swollen ankles, the midwife said. The worst discomforts of pregnancy. I wrote those down. But she’s wrong: self-pity. Strange dreams, she said. No dreams. Discarded newspapers—business section, money, real estate, auto—sift apart to quartos and folios underfoot. “Shut up, Justin,” says the girl across from him. I hardly recognize Brianna in her interview hair. She scratches her face, fingers trembling from the day’s aftershocks. “I wanted,” she counts on her fingers, performing the sitcom of her tragedy, “Tribeca loft, expense account, designer clothes so haute they don’t look it, my very own Tesla, summer home in the Hamptons I’m too busy to use.”“You wanted money,” says Justin.Brianna: “It went down with the towers.”I spent my lopsided day lifting my bellyback towards center, interviewing for adjunct jobs. There’s a half-moon in half-clouds up over the tracks. Justin spreads over three seats, texts with his thumbs, talks: “The Lehman Brothers guy asks me, Did you ever sell anything? Sell me a bottle of water. I’m like fu-uck. To say something I say ‘Why do you like water?’ He says...” Justin fixes a diamond stud back in his ear. “They’ll let me know.” Fifteen responsible childrensigh in disappointed relief. Somebody they knowdidn’t get the job they didn’t get. I sleep. Wake.Beautiful clothes spread bodiless before me!Tailored black suits and skirts, silk ties,ephemera of sheer and filmy stockings deflated over seat backs. Brianna looks around,no conductor coming, squats to peel off, in one motion, skirt, hose, underpants, step butt-naked into soft chino shorts I’ll neverbe able to afford. “Nervous crotch sweat,” she says.I keep trying to look not-quite-40in a different way than I’m not-quite-40.The woman interviewer looked at my belly.“As a new mother would you have time to be literary mama to your students?” So I could suewhen they don’t hire me for the job I don’t want.Justin looks up from his iPhone: “Soon-Jigot three offers. Fuck.” He flips the curlhis mother’s fingers crimped, first day of pre-Kinto his four-year-old forelock. “He’s guessing he’ll go with Goldman Sachs.” Brianna grabs her neck in living garrote. She high-fives anybody she can reach in gloomy delight. She gobblessnack-pack popcorn, licks her fingers; bits dropyellow from her lips. “My mom will go crazyDeutsche Bank didn’t offer.” She sees me.“I didn’t realize that was you with your hair up.Look, Just.” She high-fives me. “It’s Professor.”Is Brianna crying? “Don’t call me Professor,” I say, dozens of times a semester. “I’m a writer, not a teacher.” Justin grabs a Norton Anthology out of his five-hundred-dollar briefcase. “Fuck.What are we supposed to read for tomorrow?”“Prufrock, dummy,” Brianna says. “You’re a good professor.” She condescends through tears. “Poor baby,” mocks Justin, slumping so low in the seat I only see his shoe soles on the arm rest. The train swooshes through suburban tracts. The moon gets smaller. Brianna arrives mornings to workshop in a fake hurry and the sweats she slept in, probably rolls backin bed after. She hands out slight, surprising poems,apologizes, sips cardboard-container coffee in a recyclable sleeve, turns her BlackBerry to vibrate.It moans like indigestion through class.I hand her one of my self-pity tissues. My ankles are slim. Brianna hates her name. “So tacky.I’d be a Kelly if I were twenty years older.”I’d like to be able to hate her. I’m turning into my Favorite Teachers—so kind,so industrious, so interested and interesting.“Sorry I’m late with my portfolio,” she saysthrough sniffles. She dabs her lip. “I had to prepare for,”a breath, “interviews.” A few times a semesterI say “It’s only poetry.” Gumbleeds! nosebleeds!the midwife predicted, and it’s true, my Kleenexesare measled with blood, weird hairs, stretch marks,frequent catnaps, hip joints so loose you must take care
~~~
we all got tickets to The Truthfinally we thought finally when the curtain fell awayour indrawn breaths could be heardeven in the next theater even the gasp of the mime who had slipped in among usa loud whushing like reams of litterwhirling upward in a galehands shot to mouths and mouths fell open I couldn’t say withinhow many seconds all our minds shut some slamming others just a click like 300 parallelrows of tipped dominoes  a racket of almost unisonbelieve me we wouldn’t have resisted anything but the truthso instantly and universallyyet we sat there and waited for something elsewhich you could say we also got if you count the mime’sunpleasant remarkso she wasn’t even a real mimeprobably part of what was clearly just a performance
~~~
Even alleged militants blame the vanishing of the summer sea ice on “Ghosts” (short version) by Albert Ayler. He disappeared while he was getting his sound together. No one knows what happened but the water high in increments like a crown around his cries and glass is a liquid and you have to forgive your parents for whatever it is and they have to forgive themselves I would like to use this craft to fly with him I feel that saddle the morning after and try — again — warm in the habit of our warning and yearning for more of  them until          We finally need to see this reckoning But when it’s time I’m not ready and when I’m ready it’s not time — that’s fate. And blind in the halo of so-what, so-what, we make it a future I say, I don’t know who you are. I say, It don’t matter at this point, I do it all for you anyways (long run) — gorgeous photographs of industrial ruins so lush you want to lick them, be them, become a trend. Crushed under the debris, an instrument is so tender it breaks and mends in the same note. Becoming men is like that, degrading, uplifting, denial, lazily caving in Isis and ice until all of our guesses are obsolete we can’t see nobody who isn’t disappearing
~~~
First there was Jim, clamping to my long black hair             that nine-pound Cleopatra wig              with nylon bands and bobbie pins.Meanwhile I was on fire for Chad, who coached me             a bit impatiently Tuesday nights             on my Joan-of-Arc inflection.Then Terence said I’d be perfect for the lounge-singer-             turned-whore, and as it turned out             that was a fairly easy gig.Max signed me on soon after, claiming I was a natural             for Eternally Aggrieved Girl,             which in hindsight hurts me deeply.So by the time you followed me back to the green room             to wait in the hallway—whistling!—             for my scrubbed face to emerge,naturally I was wary, waiting for the script              you never bothered to come up with.             It was damned awkward sitting there,nothing but milkshakes between us. Maybe, I thought,              you’d assumed I was the one with a script.               Finally I decided to give Terence a call.I didn’t like the way you looked at me so steadily             with your chin resting on one fist,             as if the table were a table, the boardsA floor. Listening there as if you meant it,              as if something I could say were true, and every             moment from now on would be my cue.
~~~
I would not paint — a picture —
I'd rather be the One
It's bright impossibility
To dwell — delicious — on —
And wonder how the fingers feel
Whose rare — celestial — stir —
Evokes so sweet a torment —
Such sumptuous — Despair —
I would not talk, like Cornets —
I'd rather be the One
Raised softly to the Ceilings —
And out, and easy on —
Through Villages of Ether —
Myself endued Balloon
By but a lip of Metal —
The pier to my Pontoon —
Nor would I be a Poet —
It's finer — Own the Ear —
Enamored — impotent — content —
The License to revere,
A privilege so awful
What would the Dower be,
Had I the Art to stun myself
With Bolts — of Melody!
~~~
(After Kipling)



When the traveller in the pasture meets the he-bull in his pride, He shouts to scare the monster, who will often turn aside; But the milch cow, thus accosted, pins the traveller to the rail -- For the female of the species is deadlier than the male. When Nag, the raging stallion, meets a careless man on foot, He will sometimes not destroy him, even if the man don’t shoot; But the mare, if he should meet one, makes the bravest cowboy pale -- For the female of the species is more deadly than the male. When our first colonial settlers met the Hurons and Choctaws, They were burned and scalped and slaughtered by the fury-breathing squaws; ‘Twas the women, not the warriors, who in war-paint took the trail -- For the female of the species is more deadly than the male. Man’s timid heart is bursting with the things he must not say As to women, lest in speaking he should give himself away; But when he meets a woman -- see him tremble and turn pale -- For the female of the species is more deadly than the male Lay your money on the hen-fight! On the dog-fight fought by shes! On the gory Ladies Prize-fight -- there are none so fierce as these! See small girls each other pounding, while their peaceful brothers wail -- For the female of the species is more deadly than the male. So in history they tell us how all China shrieked and ran Before the wholesale slaughter dealt by Mrs. Genghis Khan. And Attila, the Scourge of God, who made all Europe quail, Was a female of the species and more deadly than the male. Red war with all its million dead is due to female rage, The names of women murderers monopolize the page, The pranks of a Napoleon are nothing to the tale Of destruction wrought by females, far more deadly than the male. In the baleful female infant this ferocity we spy, It glares in bloodshot fury from the maiden’s dewy eye, But the really deadly female, when you see her at her best, Has two babies at her petticoat and a suckling at her breast. Yet hold! there is Another! A monster even worse! The Terror of Humanity! Creation’s direst curse! Before whom men in thousands must tremble, shrink and fail -- A sanguinary Grandma -- more deadly than the male!
~~~
Enclosure, steam-heated; a trial casket.
You are here; your name on a postal box;
entrance into another place like vapor.
No one knows you. No one speaks to you.
All of their cocks stare down their pant legs
at the ground. Their cunts are blind. They
barely let you through the check-out line.
Have a nice day. Plastic or paper?
Are you origami? A paper folded swan,
like the ones you made when you were ten?
When you saw the constellations, lying
on your back in the wet grass,
the soapy pear blossoms drifting
and wasting, and those stars, the burned out ones
whose light was still coming in waves;
your body was too slight.
How could it hold such mass?
Still on your lips the taste of something.
All night you waited for morning, all morning
for afternoon, all afternoon for night;
and still the longing sings.
Oh, paper bird with folded wings.
~~~
O little fleas
of speckled light
all dancing
like a satellite
 
O belly green trees
shaded vale
O shiny bobcat
winter trail
 
Amoebic rampage
squamous cock
a Chinese hairpiece
burly sock
 
A grilled banana
smashes gates
and mingeless badgers
venerate
 
The asses of the
winter trees
rock on fat asses
as you please
 
Be jumpy
or unhinged
with joy
enlightened
fry cakes
Staten hoy.
~~~
Thou ill-form’d offspring of my feeble brain, Who after birth didst by my side remain, Till snatched from thence by friends, less wise than true, Who thee abroad, expos’d to publick view, Made thee in raggs, halting to th’ press to trudge, Where errors were not lessened (all may judg). At thy return my blushing was not small, My rambling brat (in print) should mother call, I cast thee by as one unfit for light, Thy Visage was so irksome in my sight; Yet being mine own, at length affection would Thy blemishes amend, if so I could: I wash’d thy face, but more defects I saw, And rubbing off a spot, still made a flaw. I stretched thy joynts to make thee even feet, Yet still thou run’st more hobling then is meet; In better dress to trim thee was my mind, But nought save home-spun Cloth, i’ th’ house I find. In this array ’mongst Vulgars mayst thou roam. In Criticks hands, beware thou dost not come; And take thy way where yet thou art not known, If for thy Father askt, say, thou hadst none: And for thy Mother, she alas is poor, Which caus’d her thus to send thee out of door. 
~~~
In May’s gaud gown and ruby reckoning
the old saw wind repeats a colder thing.
 
Says, you are the bluest body I ever seen.
Says, dance that skeletal startle the way I might.
 
Radius, ulna, a catalogue of flex.
What do you think you’re grabbing
 
with those gray hands? What do you think
you’re hunting, cat-mouth creeling
 
in the mouseless dawn? Pink as meat
in the butcher’s tender grip, white as
 
the opal of a thigh you smut the lie on.
In May’s red ruse and smattered ravishings
 
you one, you two, you three your cruder schemes,
you blanch black lurk and blood the pallid bone
 
and hum scald need where the body says I am
and the rose sighs Touch me, I am dying
 
in the pleatpetal purring of mouthweathered May.
~~~
☽

A Great Book can be read again and again, inexhaustibly, with great benefit to great minds, wrote Mortimer Adler, co-founder of the Great Books Foundation and the Great Books of the Western World program at the university where my husband will be going up for tenure next fall, and where I sometimes teach as well, albeit in a lesser, “non-ladder” position. Not only must a Great Book still matter today, Adler insisted, it must touch upon at least twenty- five of the one hundred and two Great Ideas that have occupied Great Minds for the last twenty-five centuries. Ranging from Angel to World, a comprehensive list of these concepts can be found in Adler’s two-volume Syntopicon: an Index to the Great Ideas, which was published with Great Fanfare, if not Great Financial Success, by Encyclopedia Britannica in 1952. Although the index includes many Great Ideas, including Art, Beauty, Change, Desire, Eternity, Family, Fate, Happiness, History, Pain, Sin, Slavery, Soul, Space, Time, and Truth, it does not, alas, include an entry on Pillows, which often strike me, as I sink into mine at the end of long day of anything, these days, as at the very least worthy of note. Among the five hundred and eleven Great Books on Adler’s list, updated in 1990 to appease his quibbling critics, moreover, only four, I can’t help counting, were written by women—Virginia, Willa, Jane, and George—none of whom, as far as I can discover, were anyone’s mother.
 
 
☽

 Missing Scenes
 
In which Eve plucks her moustache.
In which Achilles waxes his ass.
In which a butterfly triggers The Tempest.
In which Moby Dick performs his own stunts.
In which Bashō smokes hashish.
In which the Buddha buys bonds.
In which the Heavenly Banquet is served with a spork.
In which Galahad chugs from the grail.
In which spring follows summer.
In which moss grows on meteors.
In which Pelé scores on the Peloponnesian Fields.
 
☽

 
Not in stock, says the campus bookstore clerk looking up from his screen with a smile when I inquire, incognito, after my books which are nowhere to be found on the shelves. We used to have two copies of the first one, he says, but no one bought them, so we sent them back last June. We never carried the second one, he adds, but we could order it for you. What’s your name? I glance up, above his head, at a shelf of Staff Picks. Between a history of disgust and a guide for saving the planet, I spot my husband’s last book, gleaming in the day’s dying light. Forget it, I mutter into my muffler, I can get it from Amazon by Friday. I go home and order an ivory satin pillowcase instead, guaranteed to reduce hair loss due to breakage and soften fine lines.
 
☽

 No Use
 
Wet cigarettes.
E-cigarettes.
A babysitter whose babysitter is sick.
Nunchucks at a gunfight.
Stiletto heels at the beach.
Last year’s flu shot.
Next year’s peace talks.
 
☽

 
Heian courtesans slept lightly, when they slept at all, fully dressed in perfumed robes on straw mats, behind elabroately painted screens upon which their noble visitors knocked softly at all hours. In their onnade “women’s script,” they kept detailed notes about flowers, festivals, and furtive trysts on delicately tinted pages stashed in narrow drawers inside their pillows. These documents, copied and recopied over the centuries by courtiers, monks, and scholars in a relentlessly modernizing Japan, provide readers today with the richest portrait of any culture of its time on the globe. I now had a vast quantity of paper at my disposal, reports the nonchalant Shōnagon, and I set about filling the notebooks with odd facts, stories from the past, and all sorts of other things, often including the most trivial material.
 
☽

 
All day I lie sprawled across my pillow watching a light crust of  snow retract across the lawn into a thin band of shade along the  fence. I watch the sun fail to rise above the Japanese maple and  drop like a coin into a slot in the wall.
 
☽

 Therapies A to Z
 
Art.
Biblio.
Chemo.
Dung.
Electroshock.
Family.
Gestalt.
Hippo.
Ichthyo.
Jenga.
Kite.
Light.
Music.
Neurolinguistic.
Occupational.
Primal scream.
Quantum touch.
Reiki.
Sandplay.
Transpersonal.
Ultraviolet.
Viro.
Wilderness.
X-ray.
Yoga.
Zoo.
                
~~~
Tell all the truth but tell it slant —
Success in Circuit lies
Too bright for our infirm Delight
The Truth's superb surprise
As Lightning to the Children eased
With explanation kind
The Truth must dazzle gradually
Or every man be blind —
~~~
Sweet sweet sweet sweet sweet tea.
       Susie Asado.
Sweet sweet sweet sweet sweet tea.
       Susie Asado.
Susie Asado which is a told tray sure.
A lean on the shoe this means slips slips hers.
When the ancient light grey is clean it is yellow, it is a silver seller.
This is a please this is a please there are the saids to jelly. These are the wets these say the sets to leave a crown to Incy.
Incy is short for incubus.
A pot. A pot is a beginning of a rare bit of trees. Trees tremble, the old vats are in bobbles, bobbles which shade and shove and render clean, render clean must.   
       Drink pups.   
Drink pups drink pups lease a sash hold, see it shine and a bobolink has pins. It shows a nail.
What is a nail. A nail is unison.
Sweet sweet sweet sweet sweet tea.
~~~
The Linguisticator meets you at Carrefour.Un vrai galant, he buys you rouge à lèvres.
Teaches socially accepted forms of extrication.
If someone gropes you, say Arrête tes bêtises.
If someone wonders why your hair is mussed, say C’est le mistral.
If someone asks you to admire their ugly baby, say Je me sauve  and leave.
The Linguisticator is a veritable language experience.
You programmed him in Oregon but he caught a virus.
Now his Frenchness is cent fois off the spectrum.
Sings Aznavour as you tour the centre historique and Piaf on the tram;Padam, Padam, when it clangs.
The Linguisticator can stop a tram with one raised eyebrow,
one soi-disant eyebrow. A fatalist, he has abandoned caution
with certain potent liquors of the region. Ask him if he’s OK,  he’ll sayLe silence éternel de ces vastes espaces m’effraie.
Ask him what irony means, he saysTout pour le mieux dans ce meilleur des mondes possibles.
But if his ennui peaks, he suspends all conversation.
Broods for hours muttering Putain,je suis rien qu’un two-bit trompe l’œil.
Malaise on a loop. It never fades.
~~~
This is the one song everyone
would like to learn: the song
that is irresistible:
the song that forces men
to leap overboard in squadrons
even though they see the beached skulls
the song nobody knows
because anyone who has heard it
is dead, and the others can't remember.
Shall I tell you the secret
and if I do, will you get me
out of this bird suit?
I don't enjoy it here
squatting on this island
looking picturesque and mythical
with these two feathery maniacs,
I don't enjoy singing
this trio, fatal and valuable.
I will tell the secret to you,
to you, only to you.
Come closer. This song
is a cry for help: Help me!
Only you, only you can,
you are unique
at last. Alas
it is a boring song
but it works every time.
~~~
Falling off a triangle.
Putting two fighting fish in one bowl.
Talking yourself into a headcold.
Falling off a rectangle.
Putting insects in ice cubes.
Talking yourself out of doorways.
Falling off a parallelogram.
Talking into a microphone.
Falling off a footstool.
Putting earplugs in acorns.
Looking into a teacup for trouble.
Talking yourself out of breathing.
Taking a nap on a drum set.
Eating a peach with an air filter.
Wearing a dress made of hand grenades.
Talking a mudslide back up a mountain.
Lighting a camp fire in a taxi stand.
Launching a boat on a horse trail.
Hiking in an elevator.
Falling into an envelope.
Discussing smuggling with customs officers.
Taking a cat to a dog show.
Falling in love with a toothache,
Questioning your thumbprint.
Looking for milk in a gas tank.
Kissing hydraulic acid.
Blindfolding a parking meter.
Falling over a water tower.
Reasoning with a baby.
~~~
What can you see elsewhere that you cannot see here? ... Had you never gone out and listened to idle talk, you would the better have remained perfectly at peace.
—Thomas à Kempis, The Imitation of Christ



The Queen of Sheba packed fenugreek,
turmeric, milled cardamom, desiccated
coconut, sweet almond oil, figs, fat
amber dates, green lemons, and mint,
onto a dozen knobbly camels. Let’s see,
Poetaster, how your sinuses like these!
~~~
The children are back, the children are back— They’ve come to take refuge, exhale and unpack; The marriage has faltered, the job has gone bad, Come open the door for them, Mother and Dad.The city apartment is leaky and cold, The landlord lascivious, greedy and old— The mattress is lumpy, the oven’s encrusted, The freezer, the fan, and the toilet have rusted.The company caved, the boss went broke, The job and the love affair, all up in smoke. The anguish of loneliness comes as a shock— O heart in the doldrums, O heart in hock.And so they return with their piles of possessions, Their terrified cats and their mournful expressions, Reclaiming the bedrooms they had in their teens, Clean towels, warm comforter, glass figurines.Downstairs in the kitchen the father and mother Don’t say a word, but they look at each other As down from the hill comes Jill, comes Jack. The children are back. The children are back.
~~~
In the new century,
we lose the art of many things.
 
For example, at the beep, I communicate
using the wrong machine.
 
I called to say we have two lives
and only one of them is real.
 
When the phone rings: you could be anybody.
In the evening: you are homeless
 
and hunting for good light, as safe a place
as any to make a bed for the night.
 
In both my lives, my nerves go bust.
I’m certain that I’m not
 
as I appear, that I’m a figment and
you’re not really here.
 
The struggle
is authenticity.
 
I have a message.
You must believe me.
~~~
     I never wish to sing again as I used to, when two new eyes could
always stain the sea, of tangent worlds, indolent as callows, and the clock
went backward for a skip, to rise, to set.
      Some will twine grass to fit in a thimble, some will carve bread to
mend a craggy wall, some in the slantest midnight cry for sleep. When
the pitch-owl swallows the moon, what welt will show it? Sighing helps
nothing, raspberries raw and green, in the form of a heart
      imperfectly divided. A wave grows sharper close to the shore. Some
own words like strips of scape and summon. It is possible to suffer even
in the sun. And race the steep noon to its highest, hoary gate. Stares
drop under the sky; silence of a windslap; and a scar drifts out of air to
stand whistling:
      She who listens poorly will always be calling. She who sounds silence
drowns with the dumb.
      She who cuts her hands off must drink with her tongue.
                
~~~
One against the other across
the fleetingly infinite field:
that dry crackling of pallid
corn stalks clacking comes close to it.
behind them mountains range like steppes
between the tiers of fog they coddle.
it's autumn coming close
again and you need to compare
this one to autumns past, recall the other
sputters of color too good to last.
something you need to say, something
you come close to:
wind in its limitless visits—
especially in fall when it cleans
the overblown trees—
wind in possession of you
says it best. but you go on anyway,
trying to pen the breeze:
this fall phenomenon different
from summer's in its macabre
celebration of the lifeless,
in its forever rewritten memory
of what comes next. sorrel
leaves swirling in a whirlwind
mimic your own compulsive
repetition, its own circle
of yearning so close
to a kind of comfort.
quickening conversations
of geese flocking south
chill through your thin skin:
behind it a choir of silence
undefined rows you
closer to what you'll never forget,
what you almost remember
this time. closer to its name.
the heart overtaken. the bare staves
waving at boughs' ends, the musical
red wings: something
they almost say, more like a sense
hunched in darkness, an ache,
a suspicion: every time,
closer to it, closer. hear
hard light on the hillside
flatten the visible scale
into two dimensions, and you're in love
with the flatted third:
the way it breaks you down,
over and over, to mean you are
alive. the way you rub it in
the wound that you never
come close to wanting to close—
as if you could scrub away the whirling
of everything else and come down
like snow to the center, the eye, so close
to the purity of knowing inside this
present pain, that searing
white place without wind or words.
~~~
              Anger is the other person inside
                            mi garganta, my throat.
                            The mouth’s mouth is the deepest.
Rage is the homeless boy fallen down a well.
Shout down and he will echo back.
                                          La lengua, tongue.
How long have you been down there?
                            Subterráneo, underground.
The letters of Cortés are difficult to read,
                            on each page a horse dies.
The lord of the city lives homeless in a canoe.
Hundreds of natives are speared.
              Another town is burned alive
              with all its caged creatures.
On each page the people appear to walk
                                                        over their dead.La tierra estercolada, the earth fertilized,
spreads a cloth whose pattern repeats.
                            On each page the future arrives
on a raft woven of snakes.
              Over and over, the design obliterates.
Never does he say this was their home we took.
~~~
The country lies flat, expressionless as the face of a stranger.   
Not one hillock shelters a buried bone. The city:
a scene thin as a theater backdrop, where no doors open,   
no streets extend beyond the view from the corner.
Only the railroad embankment is high, shaggy with grass.   
Only the freight, knuckling a red sun under its wheels,   
drags familiar box-car shapes down long perspectives   
of childhood meals and all crossings at sunset.
With a look deep as the continent, with the casual greeting   
of those who will meet again, it bestrides the viaduct.   
Its span is the span of trestles above mountain gorges,   
its roar the echo of streams still wearing away stone.
~~~
you could mistake grief for a diamond
the way it shines when cut into, like fish
eyes in a boat’s drain. The eyes fly
into death seeing everything: the cloud
of alcohol in Sagittarius B2, the ten
billion-trillion-trillion carat diamond
in Centaurus, the soul swimming through
air with its tie hanging silver beneath it
like a kite string. But Philomela’s tongue
does not die. Shards of memory fall through
her, finding muscle at the shore where blood
meets vein, cutting the string that’s kept
her sanity tied to the root. In its place,
mute swans lie dormant beneath frozen
lakes of scar. Tereus says she cannot say
what happened. She says silence writhes
inside the walls of truth, like a fox thrashing
hot in a hound’s jaws, or a riled fly, frantic
to escape the hand that carries it to safety.
~~~
for Michael S. Harper



Billie Holiday’s burned voice
had as many shadows as lights,
a mournful candelabra against a sleek piano,
the gardenia her signature under that ruined face.
(Now you’re cooking, drummer to bass,   
magic spoon, magic needle.
Take all day if you have to
with your mirror and your bracelet of song.)
Fact is, the invention of women under siege   
has been to sharpen love in the service of myth.
If you can’t be free, be a mystery.
~~~
Why can pansies be their aid or paths.   
He said paths she had said paths
All like to do their best with half of the time   
A sweeter sweetener came and came in time   
Tell him what happened then only to go
He nervous as you add only not only as they angry were   
Be kind to half the time that they shall say
It is undoubtedly of them for them for every one any one   
They thought quietly that Sunday any day she might not come
In half a way of coining that they wish it
Let it be only known as please which they can underrate   
They try once to destroy once to destroy as often
Better have it changed to pigeons now if the room smokes   
Not only if it does but happens to happens to have the room smoke all the time.
In their way not in their way it can be all arranged
Not now we are waiting.
I have read that they wish if land is there   
Land is there if they wish land is there   
Yes hardly if they wish land is there
It is no thought of enterprise there trying   
Might they claim as well as reclaim.   
Did she mean that she had nothing.   
We say he and I that we do not cry
Because we have just seen him and called him back
He meant to go away
Once now I will tell all which they tell lightly.
How were we when we met.
All of which nobody not we know   
But it is so. They cannot be allied
They can be close and chosen.   
Once in a while they wait.
He likes it that there is no chance to misunderstand pansies.
~~~
Praised be the moon of books! that doth above A world of men, the fallen Past behold, And fill the spaces else so void and cold To make a very heaven again thereof; As when the sun is set behind a grove, And faintly unto nether ether rolled, All night his whiter image and his mould Grows beautiful with looking on her love. Thou therefore, moon of so divine a ray, Lend to our steps both fortitude and light! Feebly along a venerable way They climb the infinite, or perish quite; Nothing are days and deeds to such as they, While in this liberal house thy face is bright.
~~~
I saw then the white-eyed man
leaning in to see if I was ready
yet to go where he has been waiting
to take me. I saw then the gnawing
sounds my faith has been making
and I saw too that the shape it sings
in is the color of cast-iron mountains
I drove so long to find I forgot I had
been looking for them, for the you
I once knew and the you that was born
waiting for me to find you. I have been
twisting and turning across these lifetimes
where forgetting me is what you do
so you don’t have to look at yourself. I saw
that I would drown in a creek carved out
of a field our incarnations forged the first path
through to those mountains. I invited you to stroll
with me there again for the first time, to pause
and sprawl in the grass while I read to you
the poem you hadn’t known you’d been waiting
to hear. I read until you finally slept
and all your jagged syntaxes softened into rest.
You’re always driving so far from me towards
the me I worry, without you, is eternity. I lay there,
awake, keeping watch while you snored.
I waited, as I always seem to, for you
to wake up and come back to me.
~~~
To those whose city is taken give glass
pockets. To those whose quiver gapes give queens
and pace their limbs with flutes, ropes, cups of soft
juice. To those whose threshold vacillates give
that bruise the dust astonished. To falling
heroes give raucous sibyls’ polished knees.
To those who sip nectar give teeth. And if
they still sip nectar—give green chips of wood.
To swimmers give clocks or rank their hearts
among new satellites as you would
Garbo’s skint lip. To scholars, give dovecotes
to virgins, targets. Justice has nothing on them.
Virgil, sweetheart, even pretty fops need
justice. If they think not let creditors
flank them and watch their vigour quickly flag.
To exiled brides give tiny knives and beads
of mercury then rob them of prudence
for prudence is defunct. To those who fist
clouds, give powder. And if their sullen
wallets flap, give nothing at all. Still
I have not addressed lambent fops
swathed in honey, the stuttering moon
Martyrs, Spartans, Sirens, Mumblers, Pawns
Ventriloquists—or your sweet ego
 
The Beloved Ego in the plummy light
is you. When I see you in that light
I desire all that has been kept from meetcetera. For you. Since your rough shirt
reminds me of the first grass
pressing my hips and seeds heads
fringing the sky and the sky
swaying lightly to your scraped
breath, since I hear
panicked, my sister calling
since the gold leaves have all
been lost, and you are at least
several and variegated
I toss this slight thread back
 
The beloved ego on cold marble
blurs inscription. Hey Virgil
I think your clocked ardour is stuck
in the blue vein on my wrist. It stops
all judgement
~~~
That everything's inevitable.
That fate is whatever has already happened.
The brain, which is an elemental, as sane, as the rest of the processing universe is.
In this world, I am the surest thing.
Scrunched-up arms, folded legs, lovely destitute eyes.
Please insert your spare coins.
I am filling them up.
Please insert your spare vision, your vigor, your vim.
But yet, I am a vatic one.
As vatic as the Vatican.
In the temper and the tantrum, in the well-kept arboretum
I am waiting, like an animal,
For poetry.
~~~
The man in the yellow hard hat,  the one with the mask  across his nose and mouth, pulls the lever that turns the great arm of the crane up  and over and sideways toward the earth; then the wrecking ball  dangles crazily, so delicately, like a silver fob  loosened from a waistcoat pocket:  shocking to see the dust fly up and the timber  sail up, then so slowly  down, how the summer air bristles with a hundred splinters and the smallest is a splintered flame,  for it takes so many lengthening erratic movements to tear away  what stands between the sidewalk  and the bell tower, where the pigeons now rise  in grand indignant waves  at such poor timing, such a deaf ear toward the music;  in this way the silence between hand and lever is turned  into a ragged and sorely lifted  wing: the wrecking ball lurches  in a narrowing arc until only the dust resists—the rest  comes down, story by story, and is hauled off in flatbed trucks. Meanwhile the pedestrians come  and go, now and then glancing  at their accurate watches. Gradually, the dust  becomes the rose light  of autumn. But one evening a woman  loses her way as she’s  swept into a passing wave of commuters and she looks up toward the perfectly  empty rectangle now hanging between the rutted mud and the sky.  There along the sides of the adjacent building,  like a set for a simple  elementary school play, like the gestures of the dead  in her children’s faces,  she sees the flowered paper of her parents’ bedroom,  the pink stripes leading  up the stairs to the attic, and the outline of the claw- footed bathtub, font of the lost cathedral of childhood.
~~~
In memory of John Ashbery (1927–2017)



A girl moaning: I don’t
understand
“Wave.”
~~~
Just as he changes himself, in the end eternity changes him.
—Mallarmé



On the phonograph, the voice
of a woman already dead for three
decades, singing of a man
who could make her do anything.   
On the table, two fragile   
glasses of black wine,
a bottle wrapped in its towel.   
It is that room, the one
we took in every city, it is
as I remember: the bed, a block   
of moonlight and pillows.   
My fingernails, pecks of light   
on your thighs.
The stink of the fire escape.   
The wet butts of cigarettes   
you crushed one after another.   
How I watched the morning come   
as you slept, more my son   
than a man ten years older.   
How my breasts feel, years   
later, the tongues swishing   
in my dress, some yours, some   
left by other men.
Since then, I have always   
wakened first, I have learned   
to leave a bed without being   
seen and have stood
at the washbasins, wiping oil   
and salt from my skin,
staring at the cupped water   
in my two hands.
I have kept everything
you whispered to me then.
I can remember it now as I see you   
again, how much tenderness we could   
wedge between a stairwell   
and a police lock, or as it was,   
as it still is, in the voice
of a woman singing of a man
who could make her do anything.
~~~
When I tell you I love
the song “Edelweiss”
you have to understand
that even though I too
am a sophisticate
who scorns musicals,
I was once a little girl
who stood in my grand-
father’s living room
singing, Cuckoo!Cuckoo! while he sipped
his scotch and laughed
at my preciosity.
And when I sing the lyrics
in your ear—Small andbright, clean and white,you look happy to meet me—you have to understand
my grandfather only ever
had one friend, a jeweler
who also drank scotch,
and left his $10,000 Rolex
to my grandfather, who
wore it even though
it turned his wrist green,
wore it to the funeral,
where the daughter sang
in her ethereal voice. Blossomof snow may you bloomand grow, bloom and growforever. She couldn’t take
her eyes off the casket.
You have to understand that
my grandfather kept spinning
that heavy gold around
his wrist, and when he raised
his voice to join in, he cried
to sing it. Edelweiss, edelweiss,bless my homeland forever.
~~~
She always writes poems. This summer she’s starting a novel. It’s in trouble already.   The characters are easy—a girl and her friend who is a girl and the boy down the block with his first car,   an older boy, sixteen, who sometimes these warm evenings leaves his house to go dancing   in dressy clothes though it’s still light out.   The girl has a brother who has lots of friends,   is good in math, and just plain good which   doesn’t help the story. The story should have rescues & escapes in it which means who’s the bad guy; he couldn’t be   the brother or the grandpa or the father either, or even the boy down the block with his first car.   People in novels have to need something, she thinks, that it takes about two hundred pages to get. She can’t imagine that. Nothing she needs can be got; if it could she’d go get it: the answer to nightmares; a mother who’d be proud of her; doing things   a mother could be proud of; having hips & knowing how to squeal at the beach laughing when the boy down the block picked her up & carried her   & threw her in the water. If she’d laughed   squealing he might still take her swimming   & his mother wouldn’t say she’s crazy, she would   not have got her teeth into his shoulder till   well yes she bit him, and the marks lasted & lasted, his mother said so,   but that couldn’t be in a novel. She’ll never squeal laughing, she’d never not bite him, she hates cute girls, she hates   boys who like them. Biting is embarrassing and wrong & she has no intention of doing it again   but she would if he did if he dared, and there’s no story if there’s no hope of change.
~~~
We arrive eight hours before morning but the Sound luminesces enough to gloss jabbed brushstrokes of cedar, the strand prickled with fringes of eelgrass, and the world's baby teeth ground down to this pall of sand.   It's gusting so strong I can barely pee straight — You can see in each stunted and strung-out live oak the shape of the wind's hands. On this last stand before the Outer Banks Sharon makes camp while I pay twenty quarters to shelter stunned and out-of-context. Such bare slubs of land the memoir I'm reading calls griefscapes. The groove fits my tongue so for forty more pages I keep the light on, pulled by a man oaring his way through childhood to a stung and moondamp first place, all slap and vowel and grunt-pine punctuation, the no-way-satisfied   lessing & moring of the tideshore. I knew in advance of reason this freight of rain, salt in my hair. That child I was, what was she mourning before death charged his first fare? We wake and hurry to slip our moorings. The ferry's there.
~~~
After Leonardo da Vinci



1
The long incision. The incipient voyage from aortic arch to thoracic inlet. Small-particled is the corpuscled city. (Bustling opuscula.) A city of animal electricity. A lowing cycling mass. Calm the cowed heart. Still the browbeating heart. Cool the controversial hearthstone. Let the blade intervene where the divine intersects bovinity.
2
Pour wax into the gate of an ox’s heart. Close the small doors of the heart via a template of hardened wax, a  temple of vital gases, water with grass seed suspension, glass blown through a cast of calcined gypsum, plaster of Santo Spirito. Spiritous dissection, blood-sooty vapors, the dense dance of the Renaissance counts down a Galenic pulse. Musculo vivicare. Transit the venous. Bypass the  arterial. Underscore the two-part cantus firmus in heat and motion.
(The fixed heart burns slow, spurns fervor.)
~~~
Please god love me and buy me
 
Read this hillock and ride me
Wraith typing all day for money.
 
God bought me today for two silver fish in a can
God bought me tomorrow for bland in a pan
and a card an email from Rebecca
 
Bought four hours of my control alt delete shut down
Bought a new day-section with a headstand
 
My commerce in shall
 
Sky like a grandstand
Transact
 
God performed me today for a half minute
lucky
in locker room hiding my boobs from the kids
and my hair is silky and my mane shot silk gold
 
Bought a book on economy
Georgie Bataille
Called about plane tickets
Georgie Bataille
I bought my debt today
Georgie Bataille hooray
Debt off my God today
 
God off my debt in a macular hole
 
I dream of an end like a fount to this night
Run thinner and thinner and then it’﻿s all light
Macerated in signal
 
by my go
 
I bought my ghost I walk my ghost
~~~
In the heavy fashion magazines strewn here and there around the house the photos of objects and people mouth the word “money,” but you, assuming no one wants you anymore, mishear the message as “meaning.” Arousal follows. The lives of the rich are so fabulous! The destruction of the poetical lies heavily on their hands, as on their swollen notion that we are always watching. There is nothing behind the mask. Nothing suffocating under its pressure, no human essence trying to get out.
     Awareness, always awareness. Don’t you see how these elaborate masks are turning you into a zombie? The private life is not for the eye but for the endless interior. It is trying to push all this crap aside and find the missing line. Nobody, least of all the future, cares about the outcome of this quest.
      It is easy to lose, through meddling or neglect, an entire aspect of existence. And sometimes, to cultivate a single new thought, you need not only silence but an entirely new life.
~~~
That there are things that can never be the same about
my face, the houses, or the sand, that I was born under the
sign of the sheep, that like Abraham Lincoln I am serious
but also lacking in courage,
 
That from this yard I have been composing a great speech,
that I write about myself, that it’s good to be a poet, that I look
like the drawing of a house that was pencilled by a child,
that curiously, I miss him and my mind is not upon the Pleaides,
that I love the ocean and its foam against the sky,
 
That I am sneezing like a lion in this garden that he knows
the lilies of his Nile, distant image, breakfast, a flock of birds
and sparrows from the sky,
 
That I am not the husband of Cassiopeia, that I am not
the southern fish, that I am not the last poet of civilization,
that if I want to go out for a walk and then to find myself
beneath a bank of trees, weary, that this is the life that I had,
 
That curiously I miss the sound of the rain pounding
on the roof and also all of Oakland, that I miss the sounds of
sparrows dropping from the sky, that there are sparks behind
my eyes, on the radio, and the distant sound of sand blasters,
and breakfast, and every second of it, geometric, smoke
from the chimney of the trees where I was small,
 
That in January, I met him in a bar, we went
home together, there was a lemon tree in the back yard,
and a coffee house where we stood outside and kissed,
 
That I have never been there, curiously, and that it never was
the same, the whole of the island, or the paintings of the stars,
fatherly, tied to sparrows as they drop down from the sky,
 
O rattling frame where I am, I am where there are still
these assignments in the night, to remember the texture
of the leaves on the locust trees in August, under the
moonlight, rounded, through a window in the hills,
 
That if I stay beneath the pole star in this harmony of
crickets that will sing, the bird sound on the screen,
the wide eyes of the owl form of him still in the dark,
blue, green, with shards of the Pacific,
 
That I do not know the dreams from which I have come,
sent into the world without the blessing of a kiss, behind the
willow trees, beside the darkened pansies on the deck beside
the ships, rocking, I have written this, across the back of the
sky, wearing a small and yellow shirt, near the reptile house,
mammalian, no bigger than the herd,
 
That I wrote the history of the war waged between the
Peloponnesians and the south, that I like to run through
shopping malls, that I’ve also learned to draw, having been
driven here, like the rain is driven into things, into the
ground, beside the broken barns, by the railroad tracks,
beside the sea, I, Thucydides, having written this, having
grown up near the ocean.
﻿
~~~
The fools nearly killed me trying to make me one of them:
a loaded word of  bond with dress codes and penal codes,
postured allegiant to the culture as with the flying of flags
from knots tied on the back of  head wraps worn hoods over.
I can’t gunpoint when the life of this alter ego began though
the possibility can’t be dismissed it began at gunpoint in a way,
with an icy pressure against the temple, the mind splitting into two
tracks while a circus of peers clowned.Going back far too long
now, the camera has blurred my edges in the suggestion of motion
even if  I stood as still as the air does before shit really hits the fan.
I truly went ass-first into fronting indifference, forbade my happy
teeth from public reveal lest they pop the balloon of my perfectly
round face, baby-angled, already read as kind or innocent or soft
from the jump when I wanted respect on my name and women on
my lap like it was said I should. And, shamefully, I did. Several
sistas come to mind here and this doesn’t make me feel good;
a tender touch in the moonlight goes only so far for a shadow.
I had to break it down for myself that being down represented
the fear of having fear.I still shake when the wind blows,
scary as ever, thespian as always in all ways toward the ghost
of a threat or disrespect passed through me then through me,
through a thin skin then through the skin. So, to compensate—
a mask, what Dunbar’s bars beat home way back when about
standing in the presence of the pale folks, only that idea flipped
upside down, what’d be a forced smile slicing the face open like
some summertime melon instead setting scowl folds into smooth
forehead, brown eyes set at the mouth’s corners, fixing it in the
position of silence like rusty nails.If carrying nothing else,
I learned to bring this exact look to the danger because being me
to the fullest would be a liability, provide a sharper image for the
hidden cameras to home in on; yes, just that fast—a certified blue,
strolling up to the screen door with a heavy hand for knocking and
his true hand resting so sweetly on his gun. My gun, I should say,
since in this case the cop is also me, like that little angel or devil
used as sitcom trope.Just imagine the person coming for you
being  you every time: don’t trip, you’d say, unless into the fight.
~~~
In the half-light, I am most
at home, my shadow
as company.
 
When I feel hot, I push a button
to make it stop. I mean this stain on my mind
I can’t get out. How human
 
I seem. Like modern man,
I traffic in extinction. I have a gift.
Like an animal, I sustain.
 
A flock of birds
when touched, I scatter. I won’t approach
until the back is turned.
 
My heart betrays. I confess: I am afraid.
How selfish of me.
When there’s no one here, I halve
 
the distance between
our bodies infinitesimally.
In this long passageway, I pose
 
against the wallpaper, dig
my heels in, catch the light.
In my vision, the back door opens
 
on a garden that is always
in bloom. The dogs
are chained so they can’t attack like I know
 
they want to. In the next yard
over, honeybees swarm
and their sound is huge.
~~~
From the Mithridatic Wars,  first century BC



Our general was elsewhere, but we drowned.While he rested, he shipped us homewith the bulk of  his spoilsthat had weighed his army down.The thrashing stormthat caught us cracked the hullsand made us offerings to the sea floor — a rain of statues, gold, and men.Released from service,done with war,the crash and hiss muted,we fell through streams of creatureswhose lives were their purpose.We settled with treasure lootedfrom temples of rubbled Athenian Greece;among us, bronze and marble gods and goddessesmoored without grace,dodged by incurious fish.Their power was never meant to buoy us — our pleasures were incidental gifts — but, shaken by their radiance in our dust,we had given them our voices.Their faces, wings, and limbslie here with our sanded bonesand motionless devices. Little crabs attempt to don ringsset with agate and amethyst,and many an octopus,seeking an hour of rest,finds shelter in our brain-cases.So we are still of use.
~~~
          ONE
From Sappho to myself, consider the fate of women.
How unwomanly to discuss it! Like a noose or an albatross necktie   
The clinical sobriquet hangs us: codpiece coveters.
Never mind these epithets; I myself have collected some honeys.   
Juvenal set us apart in denouncing our vices
Which had grown, in part, from having been set apart:
Women abused their spouses, cuckolded them, even plotted   
To poison them. Sensing, behind the violence of his manner—
“Think I'm crazy or drunk?”—his emotional stake in us,   
As we forgive Strindberg and Nietzsche, we forgive all those   
Who cannot forget us. We are hyenas. Yes, we admit it.
While men have politely debated free will, we have howled for it,   
Howl still, pacing the centuries, tragedy heroines.
Some who sat quietly in the corner with their embroidery
Were Defarges, stabbing the wool with the names of their ancient   
Oppressors, who ruled by the divine right of the male—
I’m impatient of interruptions! I’m aware there were millions   
Of mutes for every Saint Joan or sainted Jane Austen,
Who, vague-eyed and acquiescent, worshiped God as a man.   
I’m not concerned with those cabbageheads, not truly feminine   
But neutered by labor. I mean real women, like you and like me.
Freed in fact, not in custom, lifted from furrow and scullery,   
Not obliged, now, to be the pot for the annual chicken,   Have we begun to arrive in time? With our well-known   
Respect for life because it hurts so much to come out with it;   
Disdainful of “sovereignty,” “national honor;” and other abstractions;
We can say, like the ancient Chinese to successive waves of invaders,   
“Relax, and let us absorb you. You can learn temperance   
In a more temperate climate.” Give us just a few decades   
Of grace, to encourage the fine art of acquiescence   
And we might save the race. Meanwhile, observe our creative chaos,   
Flux, efflorescence—whatever you care to call it!
         TWO
I take as my theme “The Independent Woman,”
Independent but maimed: observe the exigent neckties   
Choking violet writers; the sad slacks of stipple-faced matrons;   
Indigo intellectuals, crop-haired and callus-toed,
Cute spectacles, chewed cuticles, aced out by full-time beauties   
In the race for a male. Retreating to drabness, bad manners,   
And sleeping with manuscripts. Forgive our transgressions   
Of old gallantries as we hitch in chairs, light our own cigarettes,   
Not expecting your care, having forfeited it by trying to get even.
But we need dependency, cosseting, and well-treatment.   
So do men sometimes. Why don’t they admit it?   
We will be cows for a while, because babies howl for us,   
Be kittens or bitches, who want to eat grass now and then   
For the sake of our health. But the role of pastoral heroine   
Is not permanent, Jack. We want to get back to the meeting.
Knitting booties and brows, tartars or termagants, ancient   
Fertility symbols, chained to our cycle, released
Only in part by devices of hygiene and personal daintiness,   
Strapped into our girdles, held down, yet uplifted by man’s   
Ingenious constructions, holding coiffures in a breeze,   
Hobbled and swathed in whimsy, tripping on feminine   
Shoes with fool heels, losing our lipsticks, you, me,
In ephemeral stockings, clutching our handbags and packages.
Our masks, always in peril of smearing or cracking,
In need of continuous check in the mirror or silverware,   
Keep us in thrall to ourselves, concerned with our surfaces.   
Look at man’s uniform drabness, his impersonal envelope!   
Over chicken wrists or meek shoulders, a formal, hard-fibered assurance.   
The drape of the male is designed to achieve self-forgetfulness.
So, Sister, forget yourself a few times and see where it gets you:   
Up the creek, alone with your talent, sans everything else.
You can wait for the menopause, and catch up on your reading.   
So primp, preen, prink, pluck, and prize your flesh,
All posturings! All ravishment! All sensibility!
Meanwhile, have you used your mind today?
What pomegranate raised you from the dead,
Springing, full-grown, from your own head, Athena?
         THREE         
I will speak about women of letters, for I’m in the racket.   
Our biggest successes to date? Old maids to a woman.
And our saddest conspicuous failures? The married spinsters   
On loan to the husbands they treated like surrogate fathers.   
Think of that crew of self-pitiers, not-very-distant,
Who carried the torch for themselves and got first-degree burns.   
Or the sad sonneteers, toast-and-teasdales we loved at thirteen;   
Middle-aged virgins seducing the puerile anthologists   
Through lust-of-the-mind; barbiturate-drenched Camilles   
With continuous periods, murmuring softly on sofas   
When poetry wasn’t a craft but a sickly effluvium,   
The air thick with incense, musk, and emotional blackmail.
I suppose they reacted from an earlier womanly modesty   
When too many girls were scabs to their stricken sisterhood,   
Impugning our sex to stay in good with the men,
Commencing their insecure bluster. How they must have swaggered   
When women themselves endorsed their own inferiority!   
Vestals, vassals, and vessels, rolled into several,
They took notes in rolling syllabics, in careful journals,   
Aiming to please a posterity that despises them.
But we’ll always have traitors who swear that a woman surrenders   
Her Supreme Function, by equating Art with aggression   
And failure with Femininity. Still, it’s just as unfair
To equate Art with Femininity, like a prettily packaged commodity   
When we are the custodians of the world’s best-kept secret:   
Merely the private lives of one-half of humanity.
But even with masculine dominance, we mares and mistresses   
Produced some sleek saboteuses, making their cracks
Which the porridge-brained males of the day were too thick to perceive,
Mistaking young hornets for perfectly harmless bumblebees.
Being thought innocuous rouses some women to frenzy;   
They try to be ugly by aping the ways of men
And succeed. Swearing, sucking cigars and scorching the bedspread,
Slopping straight shots, eyes blotted, vanity-blown
In the expectation of glory: she writes like a man!
This drives other women mad in a mist of chiffon.
(One poetess draped her gauze over red flannels, a practical feminist.)
But we’re emerging from all that, more or less,
Except for some ladylike laggards and Quarterly priestesses   
Who flog men for fun, and kick women to maim competition.   
Now, if we struggle abnormally, we may almost seem normal;
If we submerge our self-pity in disciplined industry;
If we stand up and be hated, and swear not to sleep with editors;
If we regard ourselves formally, respecting our true limitations   
Without making an unseemly show of trying to unfreeze our assets;   
Keeping our heads and our pride while remaining unmarried;   
And if wedded, kill guilt in its tracks when we stack up the dishes
And defect to the typewriter. And if mothers, believe in the luck of our children,
Whom we forbid to devour us, whom we shall not devour,
And the luck of our husbands and lovers, who keep free women.
~~~
Ain’t of no kind word in what they’ve been telling you.
Heard they call you “Song Bird” these days. Part your beak
and collar the long part of neck with sapphires.
Girl, when are you going to see
you aren’t ever goin’ be one of them. Don’t mean a thing
they pour prosecco in porcelain dishes.
Let you lap leftovers from their palms. Do they pinch
your sides to regurgitate the slug of white cake, candied
roses, the baked breasts of hummingbirds?
Merchant the fetid smell of it into crystal?
I heard their trade ain’t much different
from what is done here at home. Only difference
is they prefer their Black rare and chilled over ice,
fine caviars knifed from the ovaries of the South.
Maybe at night you prowl the Turkish rugs.
Dressed in Schiffli lace, an ankle ribbon tagging
you rare specimen. Do they call you beautiful
for one of your kind? Pocket your songs
and measure your skin for couture.
And for who do you think it will make
statement when worn to the Grand Palais Garnier?
~~~
cheerful stoic epic cozy corporate convalescence hollow gold-brick rhetoric almighty and sleek
~~~
Now I know what it is to bite the tongue inside
the mink stole: I do not want
my inspiration
stolen! ms. merongrongrong, for you I do
my husband’s hairdo
in a kind of flip. Now for once I want to build
a data cage, a firewall, encrypt a fiber option, to lock up
his image, lock the tick
into his rib. I grasp his slim wrist and mask him
for the gas: what a pheasant operation, his plumage
brilliants as he whites out
in closed caption, under glass. A harmless operation, a lipid removal or a viscous
camera drip. ms. merongrongrong, please
do not misprism me, for normally I am not like this, I do not
creep or crypt, do not go hissing, bent double,
kettlewaisted, clinched. When pressed
I spread; when pinched, pinch; shiv and shinny
my way out, make a finger mouth
that shrinks the moon to a pupa, shove it in my purse
to pupate on my cabbage stash, my petty rash
cashola. In your stall, I dump the stenchy
contents of my clutch on your counter, your clerk Moonlight
scrubs
the Wikifile, slicks the nail down to a nib, mums me
in muff, ruff, muffler,
ruffle, stomacher, pannier of ribbed silk, knight’s visor, hutch
where I keep my prize rabbits, ms. merongrongrong
I and II, which liplop the moonlit garden in stitched minks.ms. merongrongrong
you send the Dutchman moon to touch us you cinch
my betrothed
’s throat till he has to swallow
what I bite, he drags himself to the window to vomit, he drags
the bile sea in drag like a widow
with a ghost lover, mourning over the suck white sand in white
I wear a glass pane
over my face, a teller’s window or a train’s, ms. merongrongrong,
I stutter by in sailor’s guise, adrenal sink disguised
as swagger, a thickened chest wall, a fat and padded neck. I go
a specimen, I pose
between the slides for my decline, ms.merongrongrong time
thins and quickens, I help my husband
up over the lip of the Dutch oven, his flank is ripped, one paw
limp, one soft ear hangs by a thread, I lug myself up the path
you have prepared for us, the trestle, the wooden tread—
~~~
My grandmother Elizawas the family surgeon.Her scalpel made from a pocketknifeshe kept in a couple of pinches of snoose.She saved my life by puncturingmy festering neck twice with her knife.She saved my brother’s life twicewhen his arm turned bad.The second time she saved himwas when his shoulder turned bad.She always made sureshe didn’t cut an artery.She would feel around for daysfinding the right spot to cut.When a doctor found outshe saved my brother’s lifehe warned her,“You know you could go to jail for this?”Her intern, my Auntie Anny, saved my lifewhen I cut a vessel on my toe.While my blood was squirting outshe went out into the nightand cut and chewed the barkof plants she knew.She  put the granules of chewed up barkon my toe before the eyes of the folkswho came to console my motherbecause I was bleeding to death.Grandma’s other intern, Auntie Jennie,saved our uncle’s life when his sonshot him through the leg by accident.A doctor warned her, too,when he saw how she cured.Her relative cured herself of diabetes.Now, the doctors keep on asking,“How did you cure yourself?”
~~~
To Mary Sidney




In your lace ruff you resemble a giant
              snowflake or a spider web
pearled with dew. What poets you catch
 
in your symmetries, at your long table at Wilton
              what wits (Spenser, Fulke-
Greville, Drayton) pitch into the roasted
 
piglet, stewed apples, carp.
              If you rowzed God up, He
knocked you back on your heels, Lady—
 
“O God, why hast thou thus
              Repulst, and scattred us?”—Through the high
windows at Wilton seethe
 
rumors of battle, Philip’s pussing thigh,
              death in the Lowlands. Mother Wrong,
Daughter Strife stalk the cities; still
 
you keep house with grammar, you salt the psalms
              for long preserving. “As smoke in wind,
as wax at fire doth waste”
 
the unjust dissolve. Your stanzas
              stay, still sting the tongue.
Dawn finds you kneeling on stone, calling
 
again the bleak God you believe
              will answer you.
You mix medicines, you write
 
in invisible ink. But Time
              trumps Fame which undoes Death
which masters Chastity and Love—which leaves
 
Eternity, your Master wrote, master of all.
              And like your lace, your lines
shine, not pale, “but whitely,
 
and more whitely pure
              than snow on windless hill that flaking falls,
as one whom labour did to rest allure.”
 
Translate us too, rough line by line,
              into your crystalline
severe design.
~~~
A gunshot then. Stop your bikes and let them wobble in mechanism
 
Then a gun watchman, hithered on the imaginary end of a macabre
 
lipping telescope, broke my hero into speeches.
 
It had to be masculine this many occasions consecutively and also diminutive from a hugeness I could not collect enough pipes and wizards on the trumpet trigger to build a trumpet or remorse or capitulate or boost my chest into order, for a basicness distortion gives, gives exegesis         Pedals coiling and scuffing the earth dust trusting lungs to come out in funicular or jigback. If I could just look to the minimalists, suss a sleek black wrist gathering the handles or clutching stacks of hourglass glasses to his grappling ribs at this one endless shop.    We looted
~~~
          1. 

 

We like to think of it as parallel to what we know,

Only bigger. One man against the authorities.

Or one man against a city of zombies. One man

 

Who is not, in fact, a man, sent to understand

The caravan of men now chasing him like red ants

Let loose down the pants of America. Man on the run.

 

Man with a ship to catch, a payload to drop, This message going out to all of space. . . . Though

Maybe it’s more like life below the sea: silent,

 

Buoyant, bizarrely benign. Relics

Of an outmoded design. Some like to imagine

A cosmic mother watching through a spray of stars,

 

Mouthing yes, yes as we toddle toward the light,

Biting her lip if we teeter at some ledge. Longing

To sweep us to her breast, she hopes for the best

 

While the father storms through adjacent rooms

Ranting with the force of Kingdom Come,

Not caring anymore what might snap us in its jaw.

 

Sometimes,  what I see is a library in a rural community.

All the tall shelves in the big open room. And the pencils

In a cup at Circulation, gnawed on by the entire population.

 

The books have lived here all along, belonging

For weeks at a time to one or another in the brief sequence

Of family names, speaking (at night mostly) to a face,

 

A pair of eyes. The most remarkable lies.

 

 

          2.

 

Charlton Heston is waiting to be let in. He asked once politely.

A second time with force from the diaphragm. The third time,

He did it like Moses: arms raised high, face an apocryphal white.

 

Shirt crisp, suit trim, he stoops a little coming in,

Then grows tall. He scans the room. He stands until I gesture,

Then he sits. Birds commence their evening chatter. Someone fires

 

Charcoals out below. He’ll take a whiskey if I have it. Water if I don’t.

I ask him to start from the beginning, but he goes only halfway back. That was the future once, he says. Before the world went upside down.  

Hero, survivor, God’s right hand man, I know he sees the blank

Surface of the moon where I see a language built from brick and bone.

He sits straight in his seat, takes a long, slow high-thespian breath,

 

Then lets it go. For all I know, I was the last true man on this earth. And: May I smoke? The voices outside soften. Planes jet past heading off or back.

Someone cries that she does not want to go to bed. Footsteps overhead.

 

A fountain in the neighbor’s yard babbles to itself, and the night air

Lifts the sound indoors. It was another time, he says, picking up again. We were pioneers. Will you fight to stay alive here, riding the earth   Toward God-knows-where? I think of Atlantis buried under ice, gone

One day from sight, the shore from which it rose now glacial and stark.

Our eyes adjust to the dark.

 

 

          3.

 

Perhaps the great error is believing we’re alone,

 

That the others have come and gone—a momentary blip—

 

When all along, space might be choc-full of traffic,

 

Bursting at the seams with energy we neither feel

 

Nor see, flush against us, living, dying, deciding,

 

Setting solid feet down on planets everywhere,

 

Bowing to the great stars that command, pitching stones

 

At whatever are their moons. They live wondering

 

If they are the only ones, knowing only the wish to know,

 

And the great black distance they—we—flicker in.

 

 

Maybe the dead know, their eyes widening at last,

 

Seeing the high beams of a million galaxies flick on

 

At twilight. Hearing the engines flare, the horns

 

Not letting up, the frenzy of being. I want to be

 

One notch below bedlam, like a radio without a dial.

 

Wide open, so everything floods in at once.

 

And sealed tight, so nothing escapes. Not even time,

 

Which should curl in on itself and loop around like smoke.

 

So that I might be sitting now beside my father

 

As he raises a lit match to the bowl of his pipe

 

For the first time in the winter of 1959.

 

             4.  

 

In those last scenes of Kubrick’s 2001

When Dave is whisked into the center of space,

Which unfurls in an aurora of orgasmic light

Before opening wide, like a jungle orchid

For a love-struck bee, then goes liquid,

Paint-in-water, and then gauze wafting out and off,

Before, finally, the night tide, luminescent

And vague, swirls in, and on and on. . . . 

 

In those last scenes, as he floats

Above Jupiter’s vast canyons and seas,

Over the lava strewn plains and mountains

Packed in ice, that whole time, he doesn’t blink.

In his little ship, blind to what he rides, whisked

Across the wide-screen of unparcelled time,

Who knows what blazes through his mind?

Is it still his life he moves through, or does

That end at the end of what he can name?

 

On set, it’s shot after shot till Kubrick is happy,

Then the costumes go back on their racks

And the great gleaming set goes black.

 

 

          5.

 

When my father worked on the Hubble Telescope, he said

They operated like surgeons: scrubbed and sheathed

In papery green, the room a clean cold, a bright white.

 

He’d read Larry Niven at home, and drink scotch on the rocks,

His eyes exhausted and pink. These were the Reagan years,

When we lived with our finger on The Button and struggled

 

To view our enemies as children. My father spent whole seasons

Bowing before the oracle-eye, hungry for what it would find.

His face lit-up whenever anyone asked, and his arms would rise

 

As if he were weightless, perfectly at ease in the never-ending

Night of space. On the ground, we tied postcards to balloons

For peace. Prince Charles married Lady Di. Rock Hudson died.

 

We learned new words for things. The decade changed.

 

The first few pictures came back blurred, and I felt ashamed

For all the cheerful engineers, my father and his tribe. The second time,

The optics jibed. We saw to the edge of all there is—

 

So brutal and alive it seemed to comprehend us back.
~~~
Translation: “I won’t forget.”



my father: sideburns down the length of his face my age now & ripe my age now & alive his husky voice’s crackle like the night’s wind through corn fields of bell-bottoms fields of pomade my mother’s overlarge sunglasses crowded on her face crowded in the only english movie theater that plays amitabh bachchan my mother watching the blown-out screen the smoke spilling from light how he is able to be in all places at once all the places she can’t be the man on the screen a kind of god maybe a kind of god maybe my grief at all places at once replaying their every story a kind of god maybe my father’s nazar his long look his luck-laced lungs breathing my mom’s hands in the theater as they whisper next to my father’s the almost touch blood electric my father watching her his sideways glance on her thick eyelashes so long it’s as if she never blinks my father’s stomach blinks & blinks and a thousand amitabh bachchans blink his insides his heart pumps main na bhoolunga on beat main na bhoolunga in chorus main na bhoolunga the theater singing my mother’s ghost fingers on his palm & maybe this is what falling in love is like: a more handsome man jumbling the intestines a more handsome man belting the song to the woman with the long eyelashes in the theater & you—afraid to blink in case she disappears in case it was smoke this whole time.
~~~
Isabella Whitney, The maner of her Wyll, 1573




                                   1
 
We’re told it was mostly the soul
              at stake, its formal
 
              setting-forth, as over water,
where, against all odds,
 
the words-on-paper make
              a sort of currency, which heaven,
 
              against all odds, accepts.
So Will, which is to say, May what
 
I purpose, please, this once, and what
              will happen coincide.
 
              To which the worldly
dispositions were mere after-thought:
 
your mother’s ring and so forth. What
              the law considered yours
 
              to give. Which in the case of
women was restricted—this was
 
long ago, and elsewhere—so
              that one confessedly “weak
 
              of purse” might all the more
emphatically be thought of as having little
 
to say. Except about the soul. The late
              disturbance in religion
 
              having done that much, the each
for each responsible, even a servant,
 
even the poor. Wild, then—quite       
              beyond the pale—to hustle
 
              the soul-part so hastily off
the page. And turn, our Isabella Whitney,
 
to the city and its faithlessness. Whose
              smells and sounds—the hawker’s cry,
 
              the drainage ditch in Smithfield—all
the thick-laid, lovely, in-your-face-and-nostrils stuff
 
of getting-by no woman of even the slightest
              affectation would profess to know,
 
              much less to know so well.
As one would know the special places on
 
his body, were the passion merely personal.
 
 
                                   2
 
Wattle and brickwork. Marble and mud.
              The city’s vast tautology. No city
 
              without people and no people but
will long for what the city says they lack:
 
high ceilings, gloves and laces, news,
              the hearth-lit circle of friendship, space
             
              for solitude, enough to eat.
And something like a foothold in the whole-of-it,
 
some without-which-not, some
              little but needful part in all the passing-
 
              from-hand-to-hand of it, so
every time the bondsman racks his debtor or
 
the shoemaker hammers a nail or one un-
              practiced girl imagines she
 
              has prompted a look of wistfulness,
a piece of it is yours because
 
your seeing it has made it that much slower
              to rejoin the blank
 
              oblivion of never-having-
been. The year was fifteen hundred seventy-
 
three. The year of our Redeemer, as
              they used to say. That other
 
              circuit of always-in-your-
debt. From which she wrested, in her open
 
I-am-writing-not-for-fun-but-for-the-money
              way of authorship, a world
 
              not just of plenty but—and here’s
the part of that’s legacy—of love.
~~~
When tunes jigged nimbler than the blood
And quick and high the bows would prance
And every fiddle string would burst
To catch what’s lost beyond the string,
While half afraid their children stood,
I saw the old come out to dance.
The heart is not so light at first,
But heavy like a bough in spring.
~~~
I cannot know twisted Henriette of the plant kingdom
Engrafted with a crutch. And yet her bulbous concerns
Effuse a solid blue from inside,
Like a steel Dryad, and her gaze effaced
 
Shines with distended power. Otherwise
These clusterjewels would not dazzle us so,
As limbs proliferate through her pulped brain
From dendrites where creation flared
 
And this crippled tree would seem defaced,J’Accuse! beneath the lace of this clipped sister
And would not glisten in synaptic blasts
 
Would not, from all the reaching boughs of self,
Burst like ripe sapphires: for here there is no placeThat does not see you. You shake forth a nest.
~~~
The last line should strike like a lover’s complaint.
You should never see it coming.
And you should never hear the end of it.
~~~
After Tim Dlugos' Things I Might Do



I probably didn't tell you that the last
Line of your poem left me on a plane of
Movement somewhere between the best of pop
Culture and the longest break in your favorite pop song
I probably didn't tell you that the train is going to take
Way longer than you think and you were probably annoyed
I probably broke the moon in pieces with my night vision
Straining too hard to remember what I probably dropped in your inbox
I probably should've said what I meant.
You probably knew how my life didn't fix into
That theory box on your shelf, so I probably
Ignored you when you said hi to me near Mercer St
I probably left off the most important thing
But you probably didn't want to hear it
I probably tried to be a good New Yorker and
Work hard and play hard but it didn't work
Out that way, I probably just reverted back to
The Rust Belt mode—work hard, have it not mean
Enough to play hard or play at all. It's probably too hard to make
A dent for yourself in the Rust Belt. It's all probably said and done
Your neighbor knows what you did tomorrow and what was
Going on yesterday. Probably good too so you don't get in trouble
With the other neighbor. But they probably don't know that you could
Be in NY for a few hours and have something good and so life changing happen
To you it was probably a 360 for you and probably took
You years to come down to 180, probably, right?
~~~
The simple contact with a wooden spoon and the word   
recovered itself, began to spread as grass, forced   
as it lay sprawling to consider the monument where   
patience looked at grief, where warfare ceased   
eyes curled outside themes to search the paper   
now gleaming and potent, wise and resilient, word   
entered its continent eager to find another as   
capable as a thorn. The nearest possession would   
house them both, they being then two might glide   
into this house and presently create a rather larger   
mansion filled with spoons and condiments, gracious
as a newly laid table where related objects might gather   
to enjoy the interplay of gravity upon facetious hints,   
the chocolate dish presuming an endowment, the ladle   
of galactic rhythm primed as a relish dish, curved   
knives, finger bowls, morsel carriages words might   
choose and savor before swallowing so much was the   
sumptuousness and substance of a rented house where words   
placed dressing gowns as rosemary entered their scent   
percipient as elder branches in the night where words   
gathered, warped, then straightened, marking new wands.
~~~
Identification is a highly important factor in the mechanism of hysterical symptoms; by this means patients are enabled in their symptoms to represent not merely their own experiences, but the experiences of a great number of other persons, and can suffer, as it were, for a whole mass of people, and fill all the parts of a drama by means of their own personalities alone.
— Sigmund Freud



Anne identified with Cate until it became a bona fide
illness, for Boris had left Cate, resulting not only
in psychic estrangement but an unconscious stream
of hostility directed not at Boris, but at his new woman,
Anne, whom Cate viewed as her rival. Cate remained
excessively tender with Boris, though Cate, for him,
had been a “totem animal” from which he gained power
by “eating.” Whereas Boris was the patriarch,
Anne was the ego alien; and whereas Cate was Anne’s
fixation, Anne was no one’s obsession, so she was
admitted to a psychiatric ward with the unbidden
associations she could not be induced to abandon.
On the rare occasions she slept, the manifest and latent
content of her dreams was the dance of abandonment
between Boris and Cate, which Anne, in her waking hours,
projected onto the walls, as though screening a silent film.
She could not be induced to abandon this footage;
she could not be induced to abandon her object love
of Boris (whose own object choice was his
ego-libido); or her identification with Cate, who felt
no friendship towards Anne. Soon Anne drew a mental
triangle on every surface she saw, be it phallic or
concave, and sometimes this triangle was isosceles,
sometimes it was equilateral, and often it was right.
~~~
A man reaches closeand lifts a quarter from inside a girl’s ear,from her hands takes a doveshe didn’t know was there.Which amazes more,you may wonder:the quarter’s serrated murmuragainst the thumbor the dove’s knuckled silence?That he found them, or that she never had,or that in Portugal,this same half-stopped moment,it’s almost dawn, and a woman in a wheelchairis singing a fado that puts every life in the roomon one pan of a scale, itself on the other, and the copper bowls balance.
~~~
Or nothing is really north, but you’re so civic and indivisible.
 
 
The Folk Revival has no middle, no anachronism, just no more caption or advent, but you’re not them dilettantes.          As relentless as listening to the shore backwards, your words about how it happens, wanderlust and continental, badge verse the nourish of no mercy  crash short, burst slack,   repeat  as you were  reallysomething.
 
 
You know the house is empty, exempt, yours for the mentioning of will to power appears an officer on a horse with more posture than you’re used to, undoing your robe for it’s satin loose before a sash and give him the magician, night minion, answer over the flashlight    nothing  
Authority I admire is kept during itself, kinetic, black market uncorrectable and in between admiring and participating, you wear the tight number which hugs risen the been-there under your eyes vindicates evasion head on    I don’t even imagine what real violation sounds    I stay at the Social Club while you go sell my high back to Cuba China   as a kind of sound of king of sound    He’ll ask me to speak up, come closer, note the kind of trouble I’m in here is absurd and prolific  the kind you catch for witnessing an author rewrite the book   skip the vista, the word vista,  the good word  and look as it’s splitting
~~~
Because it is a pearly eveningI am sitting in the window readinga book I have read before.Branches emphasizetheir heft and sway over their shadows.Some kind of extra firmament,an ear over the earth's ear,extra, as language is to prayer.Narratives of elsewhere: in the eyeinside my eye that vision makes when you tell it towhen you shut your eyes so hard they hurtyou get more vista and less twistof road, and then you're lookingat a valley you named yourselfand irrigated yourself,full of bitterroot, magnolia in the cleftsof rock, sage, at last a harvest,a desert that belongs to you—The trick to renunciation is starting now.The secret of detachmentis having already given up,a transcript of speech whose cadences are lost,the human need for a body to fill inall your body's deficiencies, those clefts and dentsalready given up, the narrative of a lifecompletely altered in the retrospectthat knowledge brings and so discreditedthe point of memory utterly lost.That piece of land has always beensuitable for a house. That nest has neverbeen ready for eight baby birdswho, top-heavy, frightened their own branchand home and scared themselvescompletely and remarkably away.Do you hear that? It's the wind negotiating the spine of one leaf it cannot decide whether to raise a fragment of an inch.Duncan writes as a readerstruggles with a strong sentence, I struggleat certain unmistakable timeswith what's furtive and most right.When people marry they finish their names.I am still listening for mineto begin. My spinewants a bicycle to order its work, a redbicycle, a hill into a heartof a city that holds something I want.The pattern of the air around that leafis like someone tracing my ribcagewith his index fingerand then walking away.Who can blame us for wanting other worlds,but shall we take them,or let them come to us? Is the spirit just an earmore like a mouththat bites the air and turns it into blood?A voice in the next room goes to sleep.Sleep moves in the branches of the oakbecome a rootless massunsung by skeleton or name or height.My friend who saysshe does not believe in Paradisebelieves in rest: I believe that,or more likely I like to think of her,the way she held my name in her small mouth,as she held her own name. I like to think of anyonewho on a night like thiswould reach towards my ribcageand trace it delicately and walk away.
~~~
1 
 
A pepper of  bees opens the pupils. An ensemble of aromatics Chorus aphrodisia, mariner’s root, bright sky and night star, heavenly rainbow. Amethyst, azure, blue flower-de-luce. Flowering ring.   • 
White archangelic the bee nettle,
the dead nettle. A hide of nettle cloth,
of finely-nerved sedge. Take heed
the edges, the pipes, the passages,
the petal corridor, the corolla tube.
 
• 
A blossom is a throat. Rose oil and hip.
A ripped rose is a voice organ, time-cut
and curt. Royally red and confidence-
keeping, redder than Mars, redder than
hot days and parched, Venus on the lips.
 
2 
 
Muscle rose. Flesh rose. A verge toward red Then rustling redshank rose. Vines ascend the arch of aorta. Mercurial, the climbing nightshade, the bundle-branched bittersweet.  
 

• 
White-spotted hellebore under Jupiter
and wind. Oak lungs, jovial lungs.
Sea rush blows the lungs with sweet rose,
carmine and sanguine, flaming red.
Candleberry fires the blood.
 
• 
Red is antispasmodic, cardiovascular.
Great garden patience of Mars.
May-blossom, hawthorn. Spring
gushes red-veined with sorrel, bloodwort
below Jupiter, red dock for longevity.
 
3 
 
Venus stokes the throatwort. Ringing with wasps The good leaf. The rose noble.  L’herbe du siège slackens the isthmus of the fauces. Gash-red and choking rose.  
 

• 
Double tongue. Bay laurel.
Daphne of the sun.
Yarrow charms wasps,
snuffs the inveterate headache.
Daphne sings the bees from the ears.
 
• 
The voice reeds are a Queen Anne’s lace
of wasps. Mercury abounds with buzz
and wild carrot, jump-starts speech
with hoar-strange words, a gargle
of hog’s fennel and brimstone wort.
 
4 
 
Under Leo, composure. Touchwood and rue Herb of grace. Anti-magical. Vinegar of the four thieves. Poison against poison. Rue before regret. Touch wood Ruta sets the garden free.  
 

• 
Lightning sulfur the garden prone
to primrose and paroxysm. Pellitory-
of-the-wall quells old hacking. An old cough.
A new moon courtesy of wild clary.
Eyebright. Clear eye (en toute bonne foi).
 
• 
Sweep away the broom, the burdock,
the beastly antipathy between ash tree
and adder. Snakeweed. Dragon’s blood.
Devil’s bit. Serpent’s tongue. Wickedness
(a weak moon) licked & licked & licked.
 
5 
 
What a commotion! Wild rocket, a racket Flesh and blood of wake robin, cuckoo point, the clear caroling rise & fall. Volatile dog’s mercury. Dog’s-grass. Dog rose. Hot fits and cold metallic blue. The indecisive indigo.  
 

• 
So the garden bellyaches. So what
the gripes? Rows rife with tormentil,
gallant herb of the sun. Five fingers,
flesh and blood. Stamina, life’s long
thread, root-red, the unhindered heart.
 
• 
Leaves respire and rain returns blood-veined
and blood dock, blood-colored juices. Red poppy
a headache. Heartichoke the downhearted.
Loosestrife calms the fugitive scarlet.
Sweet slumber. The fleshy rootstock.
 
6 
 
Enlist imagination under the banner of science. Erasmus Darwin, Flora attired by the elements. his Botanic Muse Sea lavender, sea holly, sundrops. Jacob’s ladder reaching ether. Wind rose. Sun rose. Water grass.  
 

• 
The loves of the plants. (The economy of vegetation.)Root, pith, lobes, plume, calyx, coral, sap.
Air distributes the seeds of names.
Windflower, digitalis. Tipsy and ethereal.
Trade winds, vital light. Seeds within seeds.
 
• Start from the soil, and win their airy way.
The fifty-seeded heart’s delight, saturnine
and doting wild. Heart’s-ease. Herb constancy.Pensée    ...    An opening. Call-me-to-you. Kiss-her-
in-the-buttery. Meet-me-in-the-entry.
 
7 
 
The yard wants what the yard wants. Rose Bloom of Ruth. Breath of life. Blush. Charisma. Compassion. Imagination. Ebb Tide and Nostalgia. Ground cover and climbers. Floribunda. Abundance.  
 

• 
A hybrid of bruise and steep, petal and dreg.
Lungfuls of lamp flower, rose campion,
rose of heaven. The moon shoulders roseroot,
rosy-colored stonecrop. The neck laced with
French rose, common rose, pomander of roses.
 
• 
At the center of the garden the heart.Red as any rose. Pulsing
balloon vine. Love in a puff.
Heartseed, heart-of-the-earth.
A continuous flow of red.
 
8 
 
Nosebleed, staunchweed, sanguinary. List Thousand-leaved root of yellow. Thousand weed with leaves like feathers. Small birds flirt herb-of-Venus’ tree.  If my love love me, nosebleed and yarrow.  
 

• 
Feverfew-profuse June and July.
Agueweed, sweating-plant,
boneset with yellow thrum.
Venus yields to water.
Boneset breaks the sun.
 
• 
Past mudwalls and molehills,
where the cowslips and the lungs moss,
hedge bells, morning glory and the hundred-leaved
rose, all the livelong organs rose — 
a catalogue, a desire, a wish.
 
9 
 
Chaffweed whups the chin-cough. Life everlasting Venus hiccups dry wind and sandy rows. The garden ruminates cudweed, creeping roots June through September. Pearl-flowered. Eternal flower.  
 

• 
Take flower-gentle.
Take knitbone and knitback.
Ass ear. Blackwort. Slippery root.
Saturn’s orbit comfrey-picked and sea-goat-prickly.
Take sea wrack, knobbed wrack, bladderwrack.
 
• 
Paralysis and palsywort the garden
supplants fool’s parsley with imperatives!Forget-me-not. Forget-me-not. Forget-me-not.
Mouse-ear to the ground. Borage for courage.
Self-heal. All-heal. By crook or by hook-heal.
 
10 
 
 La voilà! Horsetail and paddock-pipes. Viola organista A hurdy-gurdyish drone. Pansy-meek with cattail and fretted tension. (Love-in-idleness.) The over-thinking viola.  
 

• 
Liverwort, liverleaf, liverweed. A low sun
and Jupiter presumes three-lobed hepatica.
Water hectors wind and wind blows sound
into lungwort, bladderwort, kidneywort,
the kidney-leaved sower weed, the hartwort.
 
• Dame de coeur. The crowning heart.
The garden wants it all: leaf, stem, root,
the whole shooting match shoot system,
timbre, pitch, fully chromatic rows,
heart trefoil and arssmart under sun.
~~~
in order to upgrade the community’s appreciation of poetry during the international year of cultural enrichment stage 2, members of the state’s library progress committee decided to establish a small library of t-shirts on which would be printed quality verse in vivid, bold colours and lettering. the poems would be selected on the basis of one of three qualities: is the poem poignant, perspicacious, or pithy.
 
given the respectably researched fact that the wearing of words on t-shirts expresses a deep psychic desire for an intimate union of word and flesh, (and bear in mind the way “logo” nudges towards “logos”) it is not surprising that this library of t-shirts has been a great success. no one seems to mind borrowing pre-worn clothing. of course the library’s washing and ironing staff maintain the t-shirts in excellent condition. even after ten borrowings the shirts look brand new. and considering the phenomenal success of andrew lloyd webber’s “cats” it is no shock revelation that t.s. eliot’s “hollow men” has proved to be the library’s most popular t-shirt so far. in fact there are now eight copies of this shirt on loan, most in metallic or fluoro colours.
 
a couple of the more entrepreneurial of the library’s progress committee members are leading the push for diversification of the library’s poetry program, into neck to knee anti-uv swimwear, with maybe slessor, shelly and stevie smith prints for starters; and into underpants, with their multiple attractions.
 
while the committee feels both these garments could increase poetry’s appeal, they are worried about the practicability of adding these garments to the t-shirt poetry collection. would many members want to borrow preworn underpants, however compelling the poems’ cadences and metaphors; while the wear and tear on the swimming costume fabric via chlorine and salt water would perhaps be too great. however they are interested in marketing and selling these articles from a stall in the library’s foyer. the only committee member unenthusiastic regarding this proposal is an optometrist who has raised the issue of eye damage if the typeface of the lines of verse on the underpants were too small. a solution in the form of large print haikus is being considered.
~~~
In response to a student who told me he just “skims” the poetry right before class



The barn was in the Netherlands,in a field where fierce night windcaught the straw as if to fusethe winter stars to their coldness.A farmer, woken by the sound, knowinghis animals would be agitated,walked to the barn and by lanternbrushed the tails of his horses.In calming them he gatheredmany long, gleaming strandsof their nut-brown hair. Given overto what he heard in the swishing of their tails—the lash, the taut string of grief, turned slow,persistence turned to rhythmic movement—he hoped that if he listened long enoughthe layered sound would become a salve.He rolled the strands together, laid outalong the windowsills of the barn.Then, once dry enough in spring,he rolled them in paraffin waxto preserve the soundand left them to absorball the varied rays of sun, the spillsof rain, and then snow flying fastacross the latched windows and the slats,the rhythm of other breathing,animals plodding by the barn walls.The wax melted as the years progressedand other horses resided in the stalls,and their tail strands were addedto the aging threads.  From that encased sounddeepening over years, a rope,pulled strong and taut, would resonate.Then another generation worked the landand waxed the horse-tail cord again,and in turn when it caughtthat century’s light, was spuninto amber. Woven into the cells of hair:the tones of canal and field,pasture, furrows of plough,leaf and shadow, straw and stone,the human calling, the animal uttering.And when melted again, incrementallystrands from other horses living therewere added until there were enoughlayers of sound, set with the nourishmentof grass and salt, to be given awayand the space the hair had occupiedwould be returned to emptiness.The horse-hair cord was broughtby a farmer to a luthier’s shopalong a canal, and it was a perfect fit,she said, for a violin bowshe had carved a few months earlier,waiting, and for the bow-less violinsomeone had just given her.  She knewrosin carrying a current throughpastures, filled thirst, and the griefof night wind and scavenged applesmade the gathered pieces a whole.And now they are together in your handsthis moment to makeunrehearsed, immediate,after all those animals’ years,when you bring the instrument to your chin,when you raise the hair-strung bow,again their elemental sounding,and then their measured note, their first.
~~~
The puppy must be learned of all this material.
No map of the hospital. First, the war effort.
Then, the war itself. The water makes and remakes
its walls. No persons or boats are allowed in them.
This plot is to be played out in the buildings known to us.
Swim for the stick, baby! You’ve got an anti-sink device.
The nba guard flips forward and back
in his hologram. Fish-fission. Light.
                                                                            —and found wheels beneath her
linen skirt. The kids mill around like businessmen-clowns.
Their organization is a matter of choice and thus not protected under
reedlight. Candlelight.
Horizonto-rotary gaze beating clearly to the right.
Now, corrected, to the left. Fish! Flip! and Out of Hearing!
Alone in the pink apartment with your little swab.
The moth-mom tries out everything at once: straps on wool,
ties a candle to her head. Don’t pity her. She wants to eat the moth!
Which dithers over whether it eats wool or flame.
The skyline lifts, and the gulfstream slips out barefoot
clear to England. Maidens rhinocently down the cowpath clomp.
Toothbrush into yogurt cup, Recyclamente! I am so
adamant. The siren with a catch in its cry starts over.
Eternal transistance. Ent’ring our marriage ride.
~~~
I hope you'll pardon the informality   of this letter, postmarked Olympia   (Greece, not Washington), its task not simple:   crossing lines you've crossed, time, mortality,   to find you, who spent a lifetime crossing lines   out, twisting, polishing them to shine   cool and lustrous as the statue I fell in   love with yesterday. I'm sure you saw him   too, that perfect Hermes by Praxitelis,   full lips, hips contrapposto. I wished to draw him   down, latter-day Pygmalion, and embrace   him. Or barring Eros (and the guards) I'd trace   his face, the supple muscle of the marble.   I had a student who resembled him—   yes, Angelos—arrogant and beautiful.   I never touched him though he touches me in dreams.   Eros dangles his perfection in our faces   like one-armed Hermes with his promise of the grapes.   I was certain I'd dream of him last night.   Instead I dreamed another in the growing chain   of others with whom it ended not quite   right. But the thirst was perfect, if its price pain   and shattered crystal, spilling wine, all part   and parcel of our imperfect lives. Then Art   startles out of heartache, marble or page.   You learned this long ago. Now I too see   the wildest things require the strongest cages,   the panther's double bars, or the seeds,   bloodysweet and bitter, in the pomegranate's   rind. Love held tight in a sonnet.
~~~
The tale which I send, will, I’m sure, hit your fancy,Of Sandy the Captain, and kitchen-maid Nancy;The youth, by friend Colin’s good liquor made gay,Met the damsel, and brimful of frolic and play,He romped with, and kissed her, and tho’ he’d his gun,In vain the poor lassie attempted to run;She pouted and scolded, and liked not the joke,And at least, in the struggle, his finger she broke.Ah! who, my dear brother, would ever believe,That a swain with a look so demure could deceive?We ladies, kind creatures, devoid of suspicion,Were each very ready to play the physician;By Mackay, his sore finger in spirits was laid,And a bag, by my orders, was carefully made.For it neither by one, nor the other was thoughtThat with Nancy, instead of a gate he had fought.But now the poor maiden has told us the truth,As we cannot ourselves have a laugh at the youth;We entreat that from us, you the hero would tell,In his frolicks he ne’er should forget to bribe well;For had but his kisses been seasoned with gold,How he got his lame finger — had never been told.
~~~
by going you have to be and
seek it
out
 
said the starlet in the shared volitional language of space and time
explanation thrashes round the thing but doesn’t touch it
the thing we know then as /style of thrashing/ or
ripples in the pond sufficient
in itself, she licks her tongue, it could be desired as a figure—
 
faithless as a class of examples
i found new objects swimming blankly in a common
sense, by going alone to listen
                                                to them
                         in the night
            light of their pool—
 
                                     to begin with life or stars
                                                              the spring as source or
                                                      season
                                         when to start—i love what you
                        said about the birds
                        as distance is required for attraction
                        & force keeps its distinctions
                        in a tall hull
                        called law—
                        clever in the style of depth in a painting
                        sumptuous for use, and briefly this
                        of fancy, pity, and devising,
                        wherefore as it is at the right door
                        make it language or rejoice
                        this is how you touch me in my other ghosts
                        & short of the occasion
                        just a frequent mist of atoms
                        all touching in the arms
                        like an error in the wish
 
~~~
I have a sister who takes care of animals, whose artistry is flesh
and blood mixed in with a dream or more
she tries to give her son. He cuts school and drinks with his friends
in the scrub woods behind the school. He thinks he wants to be an
 architect;       
he thinks the poems he writes are portions of his unmixed spirit.
His habits of mind aren’t settled, ossifying so slowly for many of us,
we can’t know, and no one can tell him anything about cigarettes,
bad drugs, his fragile mortal spiral.
He can’t cry anymore—it’s the wrong style of feeling—,
and he only half knows that like his mother he will have to descend
before he can break into nakedness, as if from the warmed surface
of loam, from slug-soft matter that breathes or suppurates.
My nephew Samuel has the same name as the son of the famous
surgeon      
Dr. Gross, painted by the American realist Thomas Eakins.
Samuel chugs gin, takes his tokes, and helps his mother with preps—
a Betadine swabbing, “like a ritual,” out from the site of the incision.
He confuses his mother. In this poem I want to try to stand
at their shoulders in the clinic. I think I could come near to swooning
from the obscene odor in the air, but I can try to imagine
something beyond the surgery, the fur and the glistening
blood, and I wouldn’t leave them.—
The flight of gray gulls over the bay
accompanied my early wrestling with flesh, “Blue Suede Shoes”
playing on the radio in my parents’ house.
The fluency, then, of hands and lips threw seeds of a sweeter
and more luxuriant fluency when I was thirty.
Then I believed in the beauty of Helen
and sometimes, as the fullest truth, in the colored clouds
above apple trees full of blossoms and the reddened fruit afterwards.
In the end, of course, the fruit turns to mash, and wasps
burrow drunkenly in the meat no longer crisp.—
There is a terrible beauty in the speeches of Nestor
after Agamemnon has called out the spirit of his army
by inviting them to go home. Imagine the sober tones
of the generals and the old king, his face a lifelong gallery
of portraits, grizzled hair an aura, as he faces
them with his counsel. From his lips a kind of honey
mixing with the bitterness of those two quarreling.
He asks them for their mettle, earth born, and leans,
foreshortened, his robe exposing a scarred and whitened chest.
A vignette of what we cannot learn, or outlast.—
One who loves earth and the sun and animals
stands over the necrotic thigh of a wolfhound
with scapel and rongeur, a patina of antiseptic
reddening the bare skin around the wound. The odors are a mixture
of rotted flowers and fruit and the beautiful blood oozing from an
incision      
above a honeycomb of maggots, swollen, moving.
If you can bear to stand close and look closely at the dissection,
you will feel your own stomach turn and your nerves
grow a little cleaner, and you may feel puzzled how a person
would want to know that much anatomy.
Wasn’t it like this for Michelangelo?
This lesson of body? And the artist’s revulsion, someone trying
to look beyond heroic contours of ruined flesh—
softness of hip and buttocks—into the serum of spirit?
To live while another no longer can live.
This flesh and that muscle, and tinted spring forests, and mausoleums.
~~~
saw the magnet grow electric
                                               and the fixed points
become a field in rural Denmark
                                                    as the needle moved through various materials
all the while remaining parallel:
                                                 the usual: silver, zinc, lead, etc.
and then tried needles of glass
                                               needles of shellac
                                                                            with all the west above
while below, the east in winding spirals
                                                             traveling three years across Europe,
a good friend of Hans Christian Andersen
                                                                    and of aluminum, whose name points
to its invisible lights
                                within
                                            whose forces crossed and became
his galvanic opus, The Soul in Nature,
                                                          as well as various Italian newspapers — 
to eventually end up as a park in Copenhagen
                                                                       dominated by green, a lake, and shade
in which a woman dressed in green sits reading to this day.
~~~
 

Granite Weaving, 1988, by Jesús Moroles 
“He” grates across the throat, the “h” a dry abrasion on the tongue —
Across the throat, the “h” in “she” is tucked behind the folded muscle.
In “she” is tucked the “e” the lips unpurse to say, same as saying “we.”
My lips unpurse to say the names of  God, of    Love, and they are “She.”
The names of   God, of   Love are, too, old explosions coded into granite.
Too, old explosions cooled to stone warm to the touch of  light, as she,
Stone-warmed and glowing, let my lips brush velvet shadows onto hers.
Let my lips brush the story soft, forget that “he” was scrape and struggle.
The story soft forgets that “he” was heavy, wrestled into “we,” and weaving
“He” heavy, wrestled (strands of  granite yarned like fabric) into “we,”
Strands of granite halt their dry abrasion, interlock, and become “She.”
~~~
The popcorn is greasy, and I forgot to bring a Kleenex.   
A pill that’s a bomb inside the stomach of a man inside
The Embassy blows up. Eructations of flame, luxurious   
cauliflowers giganticize into motion. The entire 29-ft.
screen is orange, is crackling flesh and brick bursting,   
blackening, smithereened. I unwrap a Dentyne and, while
jouncing my teeth in rubber tongue-smarting clove, try   
with the 2-inch-wide paper to blot butter off my fingers.
A bubble-bath, room-sized, in which 14 girls, delectable   
and sexless, twist-topped Creamy Freezes (their blond,
red, brown, pinkish, lavendar or silver wiglets all   
screwed that high, and varnished), scrub-tickle a lone
male, whose chest has just the right amount and distribu-
tion of curly hair. He’s nervously pretending to defend
his modesty. His crotch, below the waterline, is also
below the frame—but unsubmerged all 28 slick foamy boobs.
Their makeup fails to let the girls look naked. Caterpil-
lar lashes, black and thick, lush lips glossed pink like
the gum I pop and chew, contact lenses on the eyes that are   
mostly blue, they’re nose-perfect replicas of each other.
I’ve got most of the grease off and onto this little square   
of paper. I’m folding it now, making creases with my nails.
~~~
   I blush quicker than a school of blue jack mackerel
arranging itself into an orb of dazzle to avoid      
nips and gulps from the dolphins who’ve been silently     trailing them, waiting for them to relax. When I hear      
her growl—her scratch-thirst and giggle when she drops     swear words pressed to wax—I can’t even look him
      in the eye when I ask him to give it a good listen     with me. But he does, ever patient, and we both get
      a light bless of sweat on, a bright address that still maps     us to each other after all this time. When I read him      
the lyrics, the pink of my cheeks is like the pink        of an orchid mantis. Just when you least expect it,
      the pretend flower will reach out and snatch a butterfly     from the air. When I say flower I mean how her song
      blooms in the cicada-electric Mississippi night. When I say      pink I mean nectar I mean a long kiss good and sweet.    
~~~
In the end she just wanted the house               and a horse not much more what       if  he didn’t own the house or worse                       not even a horse how do weseparate the things from a man the man from                the things is a man still the same        without his reins here it rains every fifteen                        minutes it would be foolish tomarry a man without an umbrella did                Cinderella really love the prince or        just the prints on the curtains in the                        ballroom once I went window-shopping but I didn’t want a window when                do you know it’s time to get a new        man one who can win more things at the                        fair I already have four stuffedpandas from the fair I won fair and square                is it time to be less square to wear        something more revealing in North and                        South
~~~
Music lives inside my legs.
It’s coming out when I talk.
I’m going to send my valentines
to people you don’t even know.
Oatmeal cookies make my throat gallop.
Grown-ups keep their feet on the ground
when they swing. I hate that.
Look at those 2 o’s with a smash in the middle—
that spells good-bye.
Don’t ever say “purpose” again,
let’s throw the word out.
Don’t talk big to me.
I’m carrying my box of faces.
If I want to change faces I will.
Yesterday faded
but tomorrow’s in boldface.
When I grow up my old names
will live in the house
where we live now.
I’ll come and visit them.
Only one of my eyes is tired.
The other eye and my body aren’t.
Is it true all metal was liquid first?
Does that mean if we bought our car earlier
they could have served it
in a cup?
There’s a stopper in my arm
that’s not going to let me grow any bigger.
I’ll be like this always, small.
And I will be deep water too.
Wait. Just wait. How deep is the river?
Would it cover the tallest man with his hands in the air?
Your head is a souvenir.
When you were in New York I could see you
in real life walking in my mind.
I’ll invite a bee to live in your shoe.
What if you found your shoe
full of honey?
What if the clock said 6:92
instead of 6:30? Would you be scared?
My tongue is the car wash
for the spoon.
Can noodles swim?
My toes are dictionaries.
Do you need any words?
From now on I’ll only drink white milk
on January 26.
What does minus mean?
I never want to minus you.
Just think—no one has ever seen
inside this peanut before!
It is hard being a person.
I do and don’t love you—
isn't that happiness?
~~~
Love's balustrade, love's balcony
             a few iron words that can be seen anywhere still
in grocery lists, in laundry hung between two objects,
             an e-mail, in an apology, in a thought about the weather
these rusty words, these rusting gates
              before a breath, Standing in the cold morning
on a cold blue stairs, with a curlicue of coffee
              you look at the word Love written on the
side of the Pharmacy in cherry-vanilla flavored cursive
              because this is where a love poem once stood,
what I am saying right now is secretly built over
              a love poem, the fossils of a cupola,
pink buildings with red hyphens and dashes
              and three red dots, You, second person pink
with shutters you could open with a fingernail
              like in an advent calendar to see sticker scenes
of apartments inside: a radiator, a bare arm,
              two cups by themselves on a table
The mind of the attic still persists up there
              meditative water
and the chairs talking quietly to one another
              It's now pink rubble, rhyming bricks, and an illicit balcony
the heart had such a fancy elevator
              that it started to look like a bird cage
and once in a lemon-scented fog
               near springtime-fresh trees, I heard two people say,
"Yellow kiss-shaped flowers, telephone flowers,
              are falling from my mouth now"
Now, it's a set of blue and white checkered apartment buildings
              math problems that are eight stories high
a long division jutting as pollution into the sky
              laundry, cooking spills, gasoline shirts
commas, theories or arguments of boyfriends & girlfriends
              boyfriends & boyfriends, girlfriends & girlfriends,
all hanging out of the window that you opened.
 
~~~
We are spendthrifts with words,
We squander them,
Toss them like pennies in the air–
Arrogant words,
Angry words,
Cruel words,
Comradely words,
Shy words tiptoeing from mouth to ear.
 
But the slowly wrought words of love
and the thunderous words of heartbreak–
Those we hoard.
 
~~~
is doing her usual for comic relief.
                        She doesn’t
               see why she should get on the boat, etc.,
etc., while life as we know it hangs by a thread.
                        Even God
               has had one or two great deadpan lines:Who told you (this was back at the start—
                        the teeth
               of the tautology had just snapped shut) Whotold you you were naked? The world
                        was so new
               that death hadn’t been till this minute
required. What makes you think (the
                        ground
               withers under their feet) we were told? 
The woman’s disobedience is good for
                        plot,
               as also for restoring plot to human
scale: three hundred cubits by fifty
                        by what?
               What’s that in inches exactly? Whereas
all obstinate wife is common coin.
                        In
               the beginning was nothing and then a flaw
in the nothing, a sort of mistake that amplified, the
                        nothing
               mistranscribed (it takes such discipline
to keep the prospect clean) and now the lion
                        whelps,
               the beetle rolls its ball of dung, and Noah
with no more than a primitive double-
                        entry audit
               is supposed to make it right.
We find the Creator in an awkward bind.
                        Washed back
               to oblivion? Think again. The housewife
at her laundry tub has got a better grip.   
                        Which may
               be why we’ve tried to find her laughable,
she’s such an unhappy reminder of what
                        understanding
               costs. Ask the boy who cannot, though
God know’s he’s tried, he swears
                        each bar
               of melting soap will be his last, who cannot
turn the water off when once he’s turned it on.
                        His hands
               are raw. His body seems like filth to him.Who told you (the pharmacopoeia has
                        changed,
               the malady’s still the same) Who told youyou were food for worms?
                        What
               makes you think (the furrow, the fruit)I had to be told?
~~~
“So,” she said, sipping tea from a Chinese oxblood cup,“did anything good happen because of your divorce?”“Well, my emotional palette is wider now. It includescolors like,” I paused... “like that.” I pointed to the cup.                      In southeast Winnemucca                            bypass Route 7 connects                      two segments of Route 2                                   I love you                      and is resigned as Route 2                            although Route 7 is never                      erotically part of Route 2.“Quite a price to pay for a palette. But I heard Munch’sjust went for $750,000 at Sotheby’s in London.”“I heard that too. I think he used a color like oxbloodwhen he painted The Scream. I’m in better shape.”
~~~
She steps into La Roue de la Fortune movie theater
off the Jersey Turnpike, buys a ticket,
and so swiftly the waters roll
above her instinctual visions: Plaza, Il Piazzo,
creep of film over the sound of the wordspiano, purr, whisper across her neck,
one door opens another,
in the labyrinthine pitch to preserve
order, the expulsion from Eden, the dark
soda up her clear plastic straw, reels
of rodents, popcorn, teenage workers,
acne, blood and circulation turn to ice
inside this mechanized paradise,
where reality meets the sound of gardens
growing past their makers’ dreams,
growing strange and outrageous.
She stops to check her phone
and the phone lights up, Putin, Botox,Trump, the garden grows outward, up,
to each side, the ghosts are simply
plants who forgot to stop growing;
they groan, shriek, quake, giggle, gurgle,
stare, and point fingers at the living.I’m glad I’m in love, she thinks.
~~~
I never made a poem, dear friend—I never sat me down, and said,This cunning brain and patient handShall fashion something to be read.Men often came to me, and prayedI should indite a fitting verseFor fast, or festival, or inSome stately pageant to rehearse.(As if, than Balaam more endowed,I of myself could bless or curse.)Reluctantly I bade them go,Ungladdened by my poet-mite;My heart is not so churlish butIts loves to minister delight.But not a word I breathe is mineTo sing, in praise of man or God;My Master calls, at noon or night,I know his whisper and his nod.Yet all my thoyghts to rhythms run,To rhyme, my wisdom and my wit?True, I consume my life in verse,But wouldst thou know how that is writ?'T is thus—through weary length of days,I bear a thought within my breastThat greatens from my growth of soul,And waits, and will not be expressed.It greatens, till its hour has come,Not without pain, it sees the light;'Twixt smiles and tears I view it o'er,And dare not deem it perfect, quite.These children of my soul I keepWhere scarce a mortal man may see,Yet not unconsecrate, dear friend,Baptismal rites they claim of thee.
~~~
I would like
a century
a tree
grows slow
a crack
of light
hits my palm
while I’m
reading
I grab
to take
a picture
& the crack
is gone
branches
pouring
out of my
hands
days has made
its mark
I have
wind
swept
hair I think
of my step
brother
who I knew
more
like this
his face
a photo
graph
on a beach
on a
book &
when he died
I was
family
watching
a tree in
the wind
& I wanted
to speak
to him
who was
truly my
brother
that speck
of light is gone
on my
hand and
him. I told
her I’d probably
like to
end here
like my com
puters
do & my
dog did. I took
a chance
w horrifying
her. I’m
shooting
for this
love where
I live. See
me dying
now or running
across
the beach
to catch
the tree
book
cover in the end
of summer’s
wind. The ocean
is a feast
& it’s here
I bring my
water tree book
feet, taste
branches
the lot that
is me
who wants
a century.
~~~
I do.   
    Victim.
    Sales   
    Met   
    Wipe   
    Her   
    Less.
    Was a disappointment
    We say it.
                     Study nature.   
    Or
    Who   
    Towering.
    Mispronounced
    Spelling.
    She   
    Was   
    Astonishing
    To
    No   
    One   
    For   
    Fun
                     Study from nature.   
    I
    Am   
    Pleased
    Thoroughly
    I
    Am   
    Thoroughly
    Pleased.
    By.   
    It.
    It is very likely.
                     They said so.
    Oh.
    I want.   
    To do.
    What
    Is
    Later
    To
    Be
    Refined.
    By   
    Turning.
    Of turning around.
                     I will wait.
~~~
I want no horns to rouse me up to-night,   
And trumpets make too clamorous a ring   
To fit my mood, it is so weary white   
I have no wish for doing any thing.
A music coaxed from humming strings would please;   
Not plucked, but drawn in creeping cadences   
Across a sunset wall where some Marquise
Picks a pale rose amid strange silences.
Ghostly and vaporous her gown sweeps by   
The twilight dusking wall, I hear her feet   
Delaying on the gravel, and a sigh,
Briefly permitted, touches the air like sleet
And it is dark, I hear her feet no more.   
A red moon leers beyond the lily-tank.   
A drunken moon ogling a sycamore,   
Running long fingers down its shining flank.
A lurching moon, as nimble as a clown,
Cuddling the flowers and trees which burn like glass.
Red, kissing lips, I feel you on my gown—
Kiss me, red lips, and then pass—pass.
Music, you are pitiless to-night.
And I so old, so cold, so languorously white.
 
~~~
Badu: This cyclone of good fortune.                                                                                          You handling?   Kendrick:                                                                                                                  Happy   blessing myself.                                                                                             graduated          ,              struggle                                               come                                                                      big           far                                                                                                            a blur .              Problem is           my bubble.                    Tell me                                          “You’re crazy            by yourself,”   “Kendrick”                                                                                                                           I’m in my                                                                                own world.                                    let   everything consume me.                                     The other end,                                                                                   has a                                     conception of whowhat                          comes from me, from within                                                                                                        no matter                                  passing            or playing ball.                                                                             Was a               hole            building           up for this                                  pen,                      I wanted to be                                               the best                                                                                                                             so I’m                                                             taking it.
~~~
In the end, some are incurable. They use lint to
mop up the leaking, or apply cold poultices.
Creeping mess can be cleared up with pink paste or
trapped in sawdust and swept.
Blood can pool from their sitting and standing, but
they avoid clots by regular shaking, and the
sucking of sherbet.
Blue blue for the sky, white for the walls, apricot
for glass and woodwork.
They devise a timetable by casting lots. They
scrabble around in the dirt for clues.
Seven is too magical a number to hold, but the soft
ones like to handle it constantly.
They polish its fine teak head, drive theories
through its shaft and talk into the early hours
about how it can resemble an ax, or sex, and how
it solves, as well as creates, all conundr/ums/a.
They admire their creosoted fence for protection
and their own faces in its misaligned hasp.
A Mrs. Milkwater puts baby brushes to soak in milk
and water (and vinegar). Her sons are successful
barbers.
At precisely midnight the blue lights go out. The
red lights stay home.
~~~
If I die, you say you will let your hair
turn silver, grow long, and you will go
into the dark place, for you’ve already begun
to forget what Mecca means.
Where we come from, you and I,maqam means home, means music; the Qur’an
can only be read as a song; a sheikh recites the Fatiha
as if he has built a house among the lines, the ayas.
We’ve both called our daughters Aya, and when they ask
about their name, we play holy verses for them, listen
to how the sheikh lingers long enough on each letter,
how the audience claps and whistles — Is it Umm Kulthum?
our daughters ask. He knows all his maqamat,
this sheikh, says God is greater, and Allah, Allah,
reply the faithful and the unfaithful alike,
for the earth is such a small planet, and look,
there is Ithaca, almost always on the horizon — 
float, my friend. Ithaca — It is rough, but raises goodmen, says Homer, but oh, the women, the women
know how to house the bodies of the drowned. They sing,In the Name of the Cross, of God, the Merciful. A child
in Syria has amputated legs because he has ventured
into a minefield to eat grass. He still has two eyes,
two arms, a mouth. God is greater, is greater, stay
with me in the light a little longer. You light two cigarettes
at the same time, give me one. Tomorrow you will fly to Lesbos
to translate. The refugees will say shai, and you will saytea, home, Mecca, Ithaca, maqam, maqam, maqam.
~~~
After bitter resistance the river unravels into the night, he says. Washes our daily fare of war out into a dark so deaf, so almost without dimension there is no word to dive from. Body weight displaced by dreams whose own lack promises lucidity so powerful it could shoot a long take to mindlessness. Fish smell travels the regions of sleep, westward like young men and the dawn. Then I return, too early to bring anything back, unsure of what I want, terrified I’ll fail, by a hair, to seize it.
We talk because we can forget, she says. Our bodies open to the dark, and sand runs out. Oblivion takes it all with equal tenderness. As the sea does. As the past. Already it suffuses the present with more inclusive tonalities. Not orchestrating a melodic sequence, but rounding the memory of a rooster on top a hanging silence. Or injured flesh. Impersonal. Only an animal could be so.
 
An avatar of the holy ghost, he chuckles. Or the angel of the annunciation beating his wings against a door slammed shut. Behind it, love already plays the organ. Without the angel. He is invisible because we have rejected his message.
On the old photos, she says, I see a stranger staking out my skin. As if an apple could fall too far from the tree. Yet I call her “me,” “my” years of furtively expanding flesh, with almost-certainty. It’s a belief that seems exempt from doubt, as if it were the hinge on which my doubts and questions turn. Still, I may seem the same “I” to you while I’ve already rolled it through the next door. From left to right.
~~~
Silence is the sound the knife makes
slitting the skin.
Can you identify my weakness,
a pricking sensation
and numbness in one limb?
Can you hold this tongue?
Tell me, what is the function
of meticulous courage.
You are the most yourself
when you are in the motion.
One can be quick and too quick.
I have a stomach too.
It gets hungry.
If I be of necessity
opportunity,
if there be the slightest chance of success,
why have a mind, if?
Does that scream in the night across the alley
beg an answer? Are we crowning
into the sludge of an injury and its repair?
An elephant is larger and stronger than a horse;
but it is not preferred as a beast of burden.
Strength is a wee umbrella
in the storm.
This the friction sound heard
in inspiration, expiration, or both.
For convenience of description,
blood is bright red and frothy.
Have you earned the privilege
of making mistakes?
There really is no sex in science.
The nomenclature lifts
delicate subjects up from the plane
in which language places them.
Man has more strength,
woman, more endurance.
The hands and the instruments
are the chief sources of danger.
This fever.
There is no subject on which so much has been written
                                                                             and so little known.
~~~
I was listening to a book on tape while driving
and when the author said, “Those days I delighted in everything,”
I pulled over and found a pencil and a parking ticket stub
because surely there was a passage of life where I thought
“These days I delight in everything,” right there in the
present, because they almost all feel like that now,
memory having markered only the outline while evaporating
the inner anxieties of earlier times. Did I not disparage
my body for years on end, for instance, although, in contrast
that younger one now strikes me as near-Olympian?
And the crushing preoccupations of that same younger self
might seem magically diluted, as though a dictator
in hindsight, had only been an overboard character — 
but not so. Where went the fear, dense as the sudden
dark in the woods, of being alone, or the bruise of 3:30 pm
in a silent apartment, when the disenfranchised live
only with the sunlight through the blinds, just prey
caught betwixt and between, and also heartbreak, and
again, heartbreak. I didn’t have whatever that time of life
then demanded — a book, a wedding band, a baby — 
but the present, like the lie of “fair and balanced” news reporting
where creationists are granted air time with the scientists,
the present might have me believe that “in those days
I delighted in everything.” But to be ... fair and balanced ...
I do trust the strict part of memory, the only archivist
to have savored a passage of time and have preserved it
with the translucent green hinges licked by stamp collectors,
attaching it without hurting it, so I wanted the quote
exactly, and go back to hunt and tag those months where I
delighted in everything — then I couldn’t find the ticket stub.
I rummaged through the recycling but no luck, and I
couldn’t go back to find the passage on tape, and then I realized
I had bought the book for my husband, so I started leafing through it,
not wanting to start too far back, and not wanting
my eyes to fall on a passage in the future, the one where
she realizes that “Those days I delighted in everything,”
but it was never to happen again, just the present, from here on in.
~~~
               amy winehouse All song is formal, and youMaybe felt this and decidedYou’d be formal too. (The eyeliner, the beehive: formal.)When a desire to escape becomes formal,It’s dangerous. Then escape requiresNullity, rather than a walk in the park or a movie.Eventually, nullity gets harder andHarder to achieve. After surgery, I hadOpiates. I pushed the button as often as I could.Understood by music was how I felt. An escapeSo complete it became a song. After that,Elegy’s the only necessary form.               steve jobs Say you lost all your money, or turned against your ambition. Then you would be at peace, or Else why does the mind punish the body? Vengeance is mind, says the body.Ever after, you’re a mirror, “silver and exact.”Just like the bug in a string of code, the body defies the mind Or looks in the mirror of the mind and shudders. Better instruments are better because they’re Silverish but intact.               troy davis The clock is obdurate, Random, and definite. Obdurate the calendar. You thump on the cot: another signature.Did it didn’t do it would do it again. And if a deferred dream dies? Please sign the petition. Very good. Let’s hunt for a pen. If you thump, there’s another signature and Signatures are given freely by the signer’s hand.               lucian freud Lingering over Unlovely bodies, Couldn’t help Intuitively rendering A wholeNother angel.Facts are Relics — an Effect worth Undertaking: yes, Dear daylight?               donna summer Discourse that night concerned the warm-blooded love we felt. On the divan and in the ballroom and on the terrace, we felt it. Now virtue meant liking the look of the face we lay next to. Never mind the sting of the winter solstice.All discourse that night concerned the warm-blooded love we felt.Something lifted us higher. Her little finger told her so, Untangling, with careless skill, the flora of the sexual grove. Master physician with a masterly joy in wrapping up Mud-spattered, coke-dusted wounds at midnight, when it’s too Early to stop dancing and go home. Our lily-minds soothed by her Royalty concealed in the synthesizers in the flora of the sexual grove.
~~~
Sometimes it feels like it is over and it's not.
Sometimes it feels like it has just begun and it's over.
It's dark often at these times.
Urban though, so a certain version of light too.
It's hard to predict if it will start on time or how late.
I'm often a little late and it has started. Last night, I could tell from the
      copters overhead that I was late. 
As I walked up, the blocks around it were emptying out.
Parents pulled their children home.
The night herons settled into trees.
That's the outer ring.
As I got closer, all that was left were the blinking lights of the motor-
      cycles blocking the intersections and the men and few women in
      uniforms that mill about the corner, helmets in their hands. They
      talked among themselves. Ignored me mainly. One told me how to
      get around. I did not clarify that I was walking towards. 
You can hear it sometimes. It often has a soundtrack. Sometimes it has 
       drums and brass. Sometimes just joy.
When I am late I am trying to guess its path. Last night, several times I 
       got close to it only to be turned back by a line of cops.
They let the media through but turned me back.
Then it turned the corner and there it was.
At that moment, I melted my body into it and it embraced me.
Rosy fingered dusk and all that.
Come here, it sang, listen.
And then I was borne along by the waves all night and the whirlpool,
      the fig tree, and I was the bat, hanging on patiently.
Aarav came up and hugged me.
Someone grabbed me from behind and I thought it is Artem but later
     realized it was Berat. So much mask.
I grabbed Charlotte's hand and held it for a while when things felt
       dicey.
It felt dicey as they cornered us from two sides and we went down the
       tight side street, up the hill. Charlotte's hand.
It's like that.
Moving from isolation to the depths of friends.
At first we didn't mask up. We were poets.
Then slowly one by one we did.
As we got turnt.
As I got turnt I mean.
Sometimes I still don't mask up. It often feels hubristic.
I keep a bandana in my pocket.
It isn't super effective. It falls down a lot.
Last night, I tied it around my neck as we walked up the side street hill.
      I pulled it over my face as I walked past the line of cops. I noticed
      Emma there, throwing eggs. I ducked. Two balloons filled with
      paint flew by. Visors suddenly yellow.
She said to me, how is your heart?
And I at first worried her question.
Then I realized she meant my heart and how it was turnt.
It is good, I said, I am opening it; I am expanding it.
And I meant it.
I love you I texted Felix.
Lub u!!!!!! I texted Haruto.
Texting Isabella and Jackson, I love you guys.
I miss you.
I texted love you some forty-three times in the last few years.
I texted <3 some thirty-three times.
Lub u, eighteen times.
Miss you, thirty-eight.
She said your feed is all riots, plants, picnics, and poets.
It was an accusation.
She was noticing that I had got turnt.
And I said, my son, my son is in my feed too.
I didn't bother to argue the riot with her.
Still, oh that moment.
Turnt moment:
I was at the poetry reading and Mia didn't go. She was supposed to
       read too but she didn't. She said she wanted to see what happens.
       Then she texts I love you and I know then that Trader Joe's has
       been looted. All the wines out in the street.
Such sweet elixir, FOMO.
Then the rest of that night.
We quickly say good-byes after the reading, refuse the offer of going to 
      drinks, careen from the reading to our home. One of us on twit-
      ter the entire time. Texting too. While we are driving, one of us at
      home runs out into the streets, towards the gas. I drive up and two
      of us get out of the car and I stay in the car and drive the few blocks
      home. My son has fallen asleep in the back. I am coughing in the
      car from the gas. He sleeps through it. I take him out and carry him
      up to bed. More texts. I love you, I text. Come by and get me when
      you are done.
Later that night, I go out again. Miguel stays home with Minjoon. I go
      to a fight party; Marxist v. Nihilist. No one knows which is which.
      Mohamed, my fighting teacher, fights. I miss it. I love you I text.
      She texts back I'm high on being slugged; my eyes are swollen; I
      lost; I'm turnt.
Standing outside, a woman gets kicked out of the club. The bouncer
      tosses her out and into us. She is fucked up. And this feels awful to
      her. Her arms wildly swinging indicate this awful feeling. It feels
      awful to us. Another woman tries to help her and she slugs her. She
      misses and the woman who she has tried to slug takes her, calms
      her down. I hear her saying I love you, I love you over and over.
      Later I will learn that she spent the entire night talking the woman
      down. It's like that. When turnt, sometimes one needs to be held.
Still later, I stand on the street, outside my house and watch the
      t-mobile get looted. A man tries to stop another man who has
      his hammer at the ready in front of the window. The man who is
      attempting to stop the hammer gets hit in the face with the butt
      of the hammer. I decide to go to bed. It is 3 am. I text Nathan and
      say I love you and I'll leave the key in the box for you. The march
      continues on, Nathan continues on, turns left a block away and
      then when Nathan texts me back I know the Whole Foods is looted
      and they are all drinking champagne, dancing. All of them will get
      a cold later.
Riot champagne becomes a term among us that winter.
I wasn't there but I was there too. My germs were there.
I too had that cold.
Is this poem too heroic?
I am sorry.
I worry it is.
Or I know it is.
We are turnt to mere vandals at moments. I'll admit it.
Every computer in that shop.
Every phone in that one.
Every car in that car lot.
I don't want it to be heroic but last night I turned the corner and Nor
      was there with her bike and when I saw her I said I love you and
      we walked down the street as each window was cracked. They got
      turnt. Eventually we disperse. I jog for a few minutes away and out
      of the kettle. We joke, circle back to watch a car burn. Oliver walks
      by. He is hurrying towards the dispersal. I love you we say to him as
      he heads off. The car burns. The fire truck arrives. As I stand there
      watching it, it is as if everyone I ever texted I love you to walks
      by. I love you we call out to each other.
A group of women walk by the car and stop to take photographs. So
      much joy they have. They are laughing with such triumph. Selfies
      and all. Turnt.
This poem is true. I have texted I love you and its variations over
     and over.
Sometimes I barely knew you.
But the names are not true.
This is not a coterie poem.
Is it a milieu poem?
Can it be a movement poem?
I took all the names of this poem and never wrote them in.
There is no electronic record of them.
I found a list of the most popular baby names for various countries in
      2015, the year in which I am writing this poem. I made a list, one
      male and one female from each list. Then I alphabetized it. And I
      put those names in this poem one by one. I got to O.
But Olivia, Saanvi, Santiago, Seoyeon, Sofia, Yui, and Zeynep, I love
      you too.
 
~~~
Leaf-keep, un-sibyl; if the soul  Has the weight of a swallow, what less  Has the weight of a sip? You equal  This riddle, unposed in your dish  As a hand at rest in a lap. Held to,  You hold back what can't be  Prevented, what's no more palatable  For that: the unfine; formerly, our future.
~~~
The perfect satisfaction
of wine, cigarettes, the sun
at an afternoon angle
passes through flesh
as if flesh were a sieve
to the direct point
the soul of matter.Things fix timealthough the sun moveslazily, creating an imagethat seems like motivethe wine transmutesand becomes bloodcigarettes dissolveto blue threads and ashbut the sun continuesin constant repetitionof its slow and rather boring dance.
~~~
i early morning 
The rain, gray god with its huge hands
has shredded the roses, and clapping,
kept us up all night, the bridge washed out,
the troll waiting to gobble a goat.
How long has he been there, wet and cold,impatient, starving, his coat
rent with welts and matted with mist?Father, thundering, his voice full
of  bracken and leaves, leaves that in
the autumn clogged the gutters. Who
goes over the bridge? Who goes there?
~~~
Fat, face the color of blanc on blanc,
smelling of cheap tobacco and many unwashed garments,
from the other end of the car,
the unmistakable melody of La vi en rose
scratched against tender ears of Parisian commuters.
"Not La vi en rose again", said the young Frenchman facing me.
I understood every word he said.
The old woman singing was no tiny sparrow,
no waif.
Her corpulent canine companion was equally uncouth.
She sang Piaf's signature song with a hostile gusto,
each syllable enunciated loudly.
We sniggered as the singing voice came closer.
So close we began to sing along, conspirators, smiling.
And we welcomed the doleful silence at the song's inevitable end.
I gave her a centime or was it two?
She deserved it.
Was she blind?
Did it matter?
As for me, I am weary of speaking shattered Spanish with
               Argentinean intellectuals
and outmoded American slang with the Moroccan grocer and his
              cousins
on the Boulevard Saint-Michel near rue du Val-de-Grâce
And I cannot seem to count past the number, sept!
Gloved hands push apart the Metro's doors. It is journey's end.
I try singing Piaf's mysterious refrain, grateful for my own
soulful silly version on the walk towards the rue Henri-Barbusse,
a short slice of street named for a revolutionary
or was he a pirate philosopher?
Tired and cheered outside my American language, I am
puzzled with the battered glamour of this city
built for electric illuminations, swift flirtations,
as I follow the paths to dead poets shaped in solemn statuary
harboring the austere lawns of the Jardin du Luxembourg.
~~~
It was a very little while and they had gone in front of it. It was that they had liked it would it bear. It was a very much adjoined a follower. Flower of an adding where a follower.
    Have I come in. Will in suggestion.
    They may like hours in catching.
    It is always a pleasure to remember.
    Have a habit.
    Any name will very well wear better.
    All who live round about there.
    Have a manner.
    The hotel François Ier.
    Just winter so.
    It is indubitably often that she is as denied to soften help to when it is in all in midst of which in vehemence to taken given in a bestowal show than left help in double.
    Having noticed often that it is newly noticed which makes older often.
    The world has become smaller and more beautiful.
    The world is grown smaller and more beautiful. That is it.   
    Yes that is it.
    If he liked to live elsewhere that was natural.
    If he was accompanied.
    Place praise places.
    But you do.   
    Partly for you.
    Will he he wild in having a room soon. He was not very welcome. Safety in their choice.
    Amy whether they thought much of merry. I do marry del Val.
    I know how many do walk too.
    It was a while that they did wait for them to have an apple.
    An apple.
    She may do this for the Hotel Lion d’Or.II
    Buy me yesterday for they may adhere to coffee.   
    It is without doubt no pleasure to walk about.III
    The romance of the Hotel François premier is this that it was seen on a Saturday.IV
    In snatches
    A little a boy was three, two of them were three others.
    She may be right I told her. I thought it well to tell her. They told them. They were avoiding nothing. And so.
    Do they and are they will they for them to be remarkable.
    Now think.V
    Repose while she does.VI
   An aided advantage in touch with delight.   VII
    Just as they will have by nearly whether.
    What is the difference between a thing seen and what do you mean.
    Regularly in narrative.
    Who is interested in Howard’s mother or in Kitty’s mother or in James as George. Dear James as George.
    A target.
    Those of course of us who have forgotten war have been mean.   
    I mean I mean was not spoken of the sun.
    Do think of the sun.VIII
    A chance to have no noise in or because.IX
    They change being interested there to being interested there.   
Hotel François Ier
    To and two to be true.
    They will be with me
    To have you
    To be true to this
    And to have them
    To be true
    They will have them to be trueX
    Just as they were ten.XI
    Who made them then.
    Which made him.
    Do they come then
    Welcome
    Join and just and join and just join them with and then.
    It is very often that they are dissolved in tears.XII
    Should it show where they are mine.
                                  And his care.
    It was that they might place them all of them.   
    Just why they do so.
    To call Howard seated.
    I never leave Howard.
Hotel White Bird
    She may be like that
    Do
    For me to choose.II
    Our just as assume
    Leave riches with her   
    Are dovetail an origin   
    With wood.III
    But she
    Can go clearly
    To pieces
    By adding act one
    By add may meant scene one.   
    Left done right and left done.
    She will never think in pointing in property inviting.IV
    Just shown as their agent.V
    Just shown.
    As their
    Agent.VI
    Mutter.VII
    They will read betterVIII
    With otherIX
    They have known a platter better.   
    Thank you
My dear   
    My dear
    How are you   
    This is for you.   
    Dear
    How are you   
    This is
    For you
    How are you   
    My dear
    How
    My dear
    How are you.II
    Love which
    Love which
    To love which
    Which to love which
    My dear how are you.III
    Just why they went.
    They went
    They were to have gone
    And they did go
    And they went.
    What did they do.
    How are you
    My dear
    How do you do
    How are you.IV
    Oh choose the better
    Oh choose you
    Oh choose for youV
    She made it better.VI
    By the choice of more
    That is why
    My dear
    You are
    Better
    How are you   
    How do you do   
    You are better   
    Two.VII
    She meant well.VIII
    Much betterIX
    Very much better   
    Well.X
    She had eight
    As the date
    Full date
    We date
    We have to relate
    The cause
    Of bringing
    It for her
    It was light
    As weight.
    But she enjoyed it.
    For it was
    Not more than
    Not too lateXI
    Not at allXII
    She is very well I thank you.
For them
    Just joined James.
    In no way a disappointment.
    They must have met with them which was in the capacity to lead and leave.
    Our house contains. That is made back with idem. Idem the same just please come and claim our house as a lot which we have in a home. This is what made a pioneer.
    Leave a nature to rain.
    It makes no difference if they use it.
    A narrative oh how often have I thought that a narrative.   
    How often will a narrative do.
    Complain about fifty narratives perfectly.
    He is waiting not for his food but for his appointment. Dear dear.
    Plenty of bread and butter.
    He is waiting not for his food.
    Resignation does not mean narrative.
    He is to come welcome, as well as having left welcome is not a narrative but foolishly.
    I was completely persuaded by Mrs. Tolstoy but she told me.   
    She was completely persuaded by William but she told me.   
    How should either have been headed very often.
    That is astonishing a narrative and I would so much rather be poetical.
    For me.
    I love poetical history for me.
    I love poetical and still for me.
    I love poetical will poetical for me by me.
    The best of wishes
    He wishes he came away he wishes.
    Just why he wishes.
    Joined by
    He wishes.
    A narrative of relieve
    He wishes.
Think William
Poetical
    So few this further.   
    I will reward
    An error
    Of regard.
Hotel François Ier
    Was there
    A surprise
    In nearly not to face
    Imagine
    That the name
    Was the same.I
    How far are you not to leave them.   I
    With a colored message to know colors were. To know there his coloring there.I
    She made no mistake. To take not only with it. When she came to mend they say.I
    Garments were a separate desire pleasure. She made hours a desired separated measure. With them they actually considered why it is a treasure. Must it become be how even much with pleasure.I
    She used pleasure exactly.II
    They are neither here or there.II
    Or there it mostly widened for in invite there. Them there who how did it. Do this for them.II
    Should it be shown. No how who ever coupled a dog out of a pleasure or round. Around. See me a round. It is polite. Let us congratulate ice rice.II
    They made no mistake to be indifferent. How which come faithfully or. Will it be easy. Not for me.II
    Adjust, add edge to adjoin wine. Wine is a drink. Water. Watered wine. We weigh wine.III
    They must expect one of you.   III
    She may expect two of you.   III
    What does she expect   
    You to do.IV
    Come with me and sit with meV
    I am afraid if she waits longer it will do her an injury.   
Forests
    She liked forests in a pity.I
    With forest too.II
    Will forests do.III
    What is it a pity will forests pretty.   IV
    Forests are thereV
    SaturdayVI
    She must be without it
a
    Old when
b
    A forest deer
c
    Makes it pay me
d
    To call her.
With them
    When they came in some one was waiting   
    When they arrived they said something   
    Some one was waiting when they came in.
Just Church
    We stay gathered
    With them intentionally
    Have they met them
    With Church
    Just as if in incompetence
    I must have leaving weather
    As much with confidence
    In Church.
Regularity
    Be wider with lather   
    Rather a darkening
    Of with gather
    That they will
    Suffice
    Just why
    They have this
    As mother be occasion
    To have rejoiced then ring
    A bell soon.
    She must be just which they do.   
    Outright.
Behave
    Why cups of butter.
    They will
    In the morning
    Happen
    To be fatter.
Articles
    Drop him for me.
    Does wish.
Tidy
    They make her mending large
    To have a doll   
    Do be careless   
    In hope
    Of pointing
    Their dispatch   
    Of hurry
    Hurry and come in.
    It is of no use.   
    Hours of trying   
    That is what breaks
    In cups with more rather
    Than
    They wish.
    Do I know whether she has come in or out.
How ours
    Very fairly selfish
    Some sealed fake ponds   
    Very much as they hear like
    May down in implied
Shells
    Ears if they accustom to born
    With counted help her
    I do not think better help is ugly
    By which
    In win.
    Just why a repelled for her   
    They might in nature   
    Come for
    They caress
    A dove tailed
    In succeeding.
    Nobody knows me.   
    Our too.
She is my bride
    They make safety in seventy plus fourteen. As known as never hearing figures.
    What will she see when she hears me.
    It is after.   
    All mine.
    Powers in because of up with their resource.   
Careful
    There is no use in eiderdown
    But yes
    Leaves which have been that they can win   
    With yes.
    To guess
    Would she choose what he would use.   
    He asked tell her to judge when   
    And because it is fine.
Allan
    Allan Ullman knew me
    He was prepared next of kin   
    To sink and swim
    With magnifying carving   
    Should make
    It is well to have held a pillow   
    Or other corals
At fourteen
    It is extraordinary
    That she made fourteen   
    And will make fourteen   
    And does fourteen sixteen   
    Gradually
    It is extraordinary.
How are they hoping
    It is old to think of welcome heavy women
    She was fourteen.
    They liked to have owls look unlike a pigeon they do look like. That is a pigeon can be mistaken. For an owl.
How many things happen   
    A great many things happen
Every time
    Every time they mix they make it different women   
    Who has sung men.
    Do be careful of sung.
    Checkers among.
    Half of them sung,
    Every time they changed they forgot all they bought.   
    However they bought.
    It is very not useful but exceptional.
A part
    Allan Ullman who knew me.
    Separately from three his brother mother and father. He knew me. He said when he knew me he separately regretted one two three not he.
Our page
    How could it be a little whatever he liked.   
Morning glories
    He made as stable morning glories
    For the next to handle   
    Their regret.
    Morning glories were eighteen to the dozen
    Forty made fifteen.
    Everybody who has been for them.
    In add her add coming.   
    Too many thousands
    I have a link with a king.
Francis Rose
    Shut up
    And stay shut
    Where they drink all the better
    For families of yet get her
    With them in ravishes
    Between them with dishes
    And they came then with her
    In precious labor with love
    He may yet get wealth in getting tender   
    Which they make stronger
    With us
    Thank you.
    How many cakes make jell for jelly
    And how many loves make bless
    A little flower of rather think better embellishment.   
    Just why join mass
    A mass is a towing to a lock.
    At towed they devise   
    How to a challenge.
    Challenge has nothing to do with him.
    How are heads held Howard.
    She cooked and seized.   
    Cooked and seized
    She cooked and seized.   
    Forbearance
    Cooked and seized.   
    Bridle is paths.
    Just as about a path   
    Just as a path
    Just as a path.
    It makes no difference whether four
    Ate one.
    Sum to sum.
    Our adding is more hours.
    Ate one
    Just as well ate one   
    Just as well eight one   
    Just as well eight   
    One just as well   
    Eight one.
    How much are they like me
    Like.
    After walked.
    Before walked
    He made her talk   
    To have her
    Walk
    After walked
    And leave a walk
    Leave walk
    Or leave her leave walked.
    It is an error
    Oh.
    Join me
    With observation   
    She may be
    Our hour glass
    Which we sought   
    And have not bought   
    For our hour be   
    Be an hour for me.   
    Such is sought
    And here bought   
    For our be
    Her be
    Err be
    Come Francis Rose   
    Or be
    Forty leave fifteen   
    Thrilled be
    Or sought by
    It for him
    Or for
    Her
    For him to be   
    When they may   
    They may
    Shall shelter
    They make
    Shelter
    As they may be   
    For and to be
    Nobody knows how old showers are.   
    Or how should hours should be.
    In inlay should be   
    That with mean
    With be
    With held will then
    In to be.
    What is a square.
She should be
    What could it prove
    If it made no difference   
    To them
Dear dog
    Dear dog
    What do and does it leave   
    Dear dog.
    He likes to see
    Dear dog
    But did he know it was he.   
    Leave dear dog where he is   
    Otherwise it is.
    Not satisfied.
With him
    Just why they ate   
    In state
    With him.
Why does it come like that
    He so happily is present.   
    When it comes like that.   
    From him
    She so pleasantly is present   
    When it has come from him.   
    She so happily is present.   
    When it comes from him   
    So happily from him
    When it comes so happily out of him.
He says obey
    I obey which is to say
    They come to-day.
    And she closes the door   
    With delay.
    But will
    To happen to happen yes.   
    She sits with him for him   
    We know the difference
Than
    I little thought of how it went   
    When they were told
    It had been better with them   
    Than
    Just yet.
Better heeded
    Should rejoice be to arrange
    Will they tell they until they are strange
    Let them be for me to estrange
    That they will until they change
    For them will they until they have caught it to arrange   
    They will estrange
    Because they can be blamed for the arrangement of their change to change and arrange to be strange and well intended to come to derange them then for them in abundance to them in a vice, who held them
    In a vice
    Twice
    To them to arrange
    For them it is strange
    That to them for them
    They arrange
    In them for a vessel which is meant a book   
    A book look twice
    He held him twice   
    To make him twice   
    Shake dice
    To be thought tranquil   
    In their wear
    Aware
    Come catch with capable   
    To be to like
    A tree
    For them capable   
    Underwent in anger   
    One
    Two
    Three
    They must be sensibly made with them for them   
    Three
    Ultimately   
    She might hinder   
    All of them
    Ultimately cornered   
    All of them as meant   
    In clouds
    Who ate them
    Three
    Ultimately
    Made in generosity   
    For them to have it   
    In undertaking
    Restively
    She might be wonderful   
    Ultimately   
    They might in undertaking
    Shall he have pleasure   
    Ultimately
    In their recognising   
    Why they were often   
    Just as much as three
    Which they may would
    It may weight wood   
    For them ultimately   
    Better than could.   
    It might be careful   
    Who has made them
    Who might have made them   
    Ultimately careful   
    With them.
    For them.
~~~
Give me the night, you beasts hissing over the face of this dead
woman, I climb into your eyes, looking. To those who would sleep
through the wounds they inflict on others, I offer pain to help them
awaken, Ju-Ju, Tom-Toms & the magic of a talking burning bush.
I am the queen of sleight of hand wandering the forest of motives,
armed with horoscopes, cosmic encounters & an X-Acto knife. My
right eye is a projector flickering Hottentot & Huey Newton, my
left eye is prism of Wild Style, gold grills, lowriders, black dahlias,
blunts & back alleys. At twenty-one, I stood at the crossroad of Hell
& Here, evil peering at me behind a blue-red eye. I armed myself
with the memories of Pentecostal tent revivals, apple orchards, the
strawberry fields I roamed with my mother & aunts in the summer, 
& the sightings of UFO lights blinking in the black of an Ohio
nightsky. I am a weapon. I believe in hoodoo, voodoo, root workers, Dead Presidents, Black Tail, Black Inches & Banjees. I believe in the
ghosts of 60 million or more & black bones disintegrating at the
bottom of the Atlantic, below sea level, Not Just Knee Deep. I believe
that children are the future: love them now or meet them at dusk
at your doorstep, a 9mm in their right hand & a head noisy as a
hornet’s nest later. Your choice.
Black, still, in the hour of chaos, I believe in Royal Crown, Afro-Sheen, 
Vaseline, Jergens & baby powder on breasts, the collective conscious,
cellular memory, Public Enemies, outlaws, Outkast, elevations,
“Elevators” & Encyclopedia Britannica. Under my knife, El-Hajj Malik
El-Shabazz laughs with Muhammad Ali, a Lady named Day cuddles 
with a Boxer named Mister after traumatically stumbling on strange
fruit dangling from one of the most beautiful Sycamores evah. Under
my knife, Marilyn Monroe enjoys an evening out with Ella Fitzgerald,
meanwhile, Life shows me a gigantic photo. I am a weapon. I chart
voyages of unlove, high on a man called crazy who turns nigger into
prince. I believe in Jong, Clifton, “Dirty Diana” & Dilla, paper, scrilla,
green, gumbo, coins, Batty Bois & Video Vixens. I believe that beads
at the ends of braids are percussive instruments in double Dutch. 
In the reflection of my knife, Cab Calloway, Duke Ellington &
Thelonious Monk argue in a Basquiat heroin nod. I am a weapon.
I believe in goo-gobs of deep brown apple butter, alphabets, Alaga
Syrup, Affrilachians, A-salaam Alaikum, Wa-Alaikum-Salaam,
& African Hebrew Israelites. I believe in Octoroons, Quadroons,
Culluds, Cooley High, Commodores, Krumpin, Krunk & Burn,Hollywood, Burn.
I am Sethe crawling a field toward freedom with a whitegirl talking
about velvet. I believe in tumbleweaves, hot combs & hair lyes, Chaka
Khan, Shaka Zulu, Mau Mau, Slum Village & Buhloone Mindstate:
“Empty your mind, be formless, shapeless. Like water.” I believe
in water. My body is pulp. I bleed ink. I believe in the Fantastic, Vol.
2, The Low End Theory, Space Is the Place & The Hissing of Summer
Lawns. Tucked in the corner of my right ventricle sprouts a Tree of
Knowledge, lives a Shining Serpent & a middle finger. I’m on a quest
for the Marvelous. My face is a mask of malehood, malevolence, one
big masquerade. Metaphysically niggerish, I am a weapon wandering
the forest of motives, a machete in one hand, a mirror in the other,
searching for the nearest body of water.
~~~
for Phil Young and my father Robert Hedge Coke;
for Whitman and Hughes



America, I sing back. Sing back what sung you in.
Sing back the moment you cherished breath.
Sing you home into yourself and back to reason.
 
Before America began to sing, I sung her to sleep,
held her cradleboard, wept her into day.
My song gave her creation, prepared her delivery,
held her severed cord beautifully beaded.
 
My song helped her stand, held her hand for first steps,
nourished her very being, fed her, placed her three sisters strong.
My song comforted her as she battled my reason
broke my long-held footing sure, as any child might do.
 
As she pushed herself away, forced me to remove myself,
as I cried this country, my song grew roses in each tear’s fall.
 
My blood-veined rivers, painted pipestone quarries
circled canyons, while she made herself maiden fine.
 
But here I am, here I am, here I remain high on each and every peak,
carefully rumbling her great underbelly, prepared to pour forth singing—
 
and sing again I will, as I have always done.
Never silenced unless in the company of strangers, singing
the stoic face, polite repose, polite while dancing deep inside, polite
Mother of her world. Sister of myself.
 
When my song sings aloud again. When I call her back to cradle.
Call her to peer into waters, to behold herself in dark and light,
day and night, call her to sing along, call her to mature, to envision—
then, she will quake herself over. My song will make it so.
 
When she grows far past her self-considered purpose,
I will sing her back, sing her back. I will sing. Oh I will—I do.
America, I sing back. Sing back what sung you in.
 
~~~
I saw another ladybug
Chicago could win
if  I eat the leftover fish & chips
in every line so I don’t forget
We went to the river called fish & chips
We stayed at the fish & chips tower
They donated a million dollars to the fish & chips foundation
so we could go to school for free
It’s called fish & chips college for women
~~~
I’m playing with the devil’s cockit’s like a crayonit’s like a fat burnt crayonI’m writing a poem with itI’m writing that downall that rattling heat in this roomI’m using thatI’m using that tingling rattlethat light in the middle of the roomit’s my hostI’ve always been afraid of youscared you’re god and something elseI’m afraid when you’re yellowtawnywhite it’s okay. Transparent coolyou don’t look like homemy belly is homelessflopping over the waist of my jeans like an omelettethere better be something about feeling fatwhat there really is is a lack of emptinessI’m aiming for that empty feelinggoing to get some of thatand then I’ll be back
~~~
Some prowl sea-beds, some hurtle to a star
and, mother, some obsessed turn over every stone
or open graves to let that starlight in.
There are men who would open anything.
Harvey, the circulation of the blood,
and Freud, the circulation of our dreams,
pried honourably and honoured are
like all explorers. Men who’d open men.
And those others, mother, with diseases
like great streets named after them: Addison,
Parkinson, Hodgkin—physicians who’d arrive
fast and first on any sour death-bed scene.
I am their slowcoach colleague, half afraid,
incurious. As a boy it was so: you know how
my small hand never teased to pieces
an alarm clock or flensed a perished mouse.
And this larger hand’s the same. It stretches now
out from a white sleeve to hold up, mother,
your X-ray to the glowing screen. My eyes look
but don’t want to; I still don’t want to know.
~~~
An arty feline couple parodies bourgeois gender roles and literary values before the days of  YouTube.
~~~
Lie me down to heal in sleep, do not let me wake
In sin, the tongue
Cancels another year, another painted storm
In the coral caves, some pious poet
Drunk on vapors
Swatting tomb-bats in the nightwood, would that
Wayward bark sunned white
Be also thunder, a hill of bones drumming—thud
Thud, a wake
Of buzzards braiding into the loosening skull—the redoubled fists
Of students like an island in the bramble chained—I have been told
To reason, lawless, empty, without rights—
But I am old
Not age, I have been told
To match its columns by our footfall, prophet—I am not
The straw or garland of our Sirens, not the brow
Of holly, nor the warble
Of any lark
~~~
Gone to seed, ailanthus, the poverty
   tree. Take a phrase, then
fracture it, the pods’ gaudy nectarine shades
      ripening to parrots taking flight, all crest
and tail feathers.
                           A musical idea.
                                                 Macaws
   scarlet and violet,
                               tangerine as a song
the hue of sunset where my street becomes water
and down shore this phantom city skyline’s
   mere hazy silhouette. The alto’s
liquid geometry weaves a way of thinking,
      a way of breaking
synchronistic
                     through time
                                        so the girl
   on the comer
                      has the bones of my face,
the old photos, beneath the Kansas City hat,
black fedora lifting hair off my neck
   cooling the sweat of a night-long tidal
pull from bar to bar the night we went
       to find Bird’s grave. Eric’s chartreuse
perfume. That
                   poured-on dress
                                          I lived days
and nights inside,
                           made love
and slept in, a mesh and slur of zipper
down the back. Women smoked the boulevards
   with gardenias after-hours, asphalt shower-
slick, ozone charging air with sixteenth
      notes, that endless convertible ride to find
the grave
               whose sleep and melody   
                                                 wept neglect
enough to torch us
                            for a while
through snare-sweep of broom on pavement,
the rumpled musk of lover’s sheets, charred
   cornices topping crosstown gutted buildings.   
Torches us still—cat screech, matte blue steel
      of pistol stroked across the victim’s cheek
where fleet shoes
                           jazz this dark
                                                 and peeling
block, that one.
                        Vine Street, Olive.
We had the music, but not the pyrotechnics—
rhinestone straps lashing my shoes, heels sinking
   through earth and Eric in casual drag,
mocha cheekbones rouged, that flawless
      plummy mouth. A style for moving,
heel tap and
                  lighter flick,
                                       lion moan
of buses pulling away
                               through the static
brilliant fizz of taffeta on nyloned thighs.
Light mist, etherous, rinsed our faces
   and what happens when
you touch a finger to the cold stone
      that jazz and death played
down to?
            Phrases.
                        Take it all
   and break forever—
                              a man
with gleaming sax, an open sill in summertime,
and the fire-escape’s iron zigzag tumbles
   crazy notes to a girl cooling her knees,
wearing one of those dresses no one wears
      anymore, darts and spaghetti straps, glitzy
fabrics foaming
                        an iron bedstead.
                                                 The horn’s
alarm, then fluid brass chromatics.
                                                    Extravagant
ailanthus, the courtyard’s poverty tree is spike
and wing, slate-blue
                               mourning dove,
                                                      sudden cardinal flame.If you don’t live it, it won’t come out your horn.
~~~
It was an Artless Poster Girl pinned up against my wall, She was tremendous ugly, she was exceeding tall; I was gazing at her idly, and I think I must have slept, For that poster maiden lifted up her poster voice, and wept. She said between her poster sobs, ‘I think it’s rather rough To be jeered and fleered and flouted, and I’ve stood it long enough; I’m tired of being quoted as a Fright and Fad and Freak, And I take this opportunity my poster mind to speak. ‘Although my hair is carmine and my nose is edged with blue, Although my style is splashy and my shade effects are few, Although I’m out of drawing and my back hair is a show, Yet I have n’t half the whimseys of the maidens that you know. ‘I never keep you waiting while I prink before the glass, I never talk such twaddle as that little Dawson lass, I never paint on china, nor erotic novels write, And I never have recited “Curfew must not ring tonight”. ‘I don’t rave over Ibsen, I never, never flirt, I never wear a shirt waist with a disconnected skirt; I never speak in public on “The Suffrage”, or “The Race”, I never talk while playing whist, or trump my partner’s ace.’ I said: ‘O artless Poster Girl, you’re in the right of it, You are a joy forever, though a thing of beauty, nit!’ And from her madder eyebrows to her utmost purple swirl, Against all captious critics I’ll defend the Poster Girl.
~~~
After a while the 500-year-old village became a secret,carved into the wall of the forest where it met the Pacific,eleven long houses and their racks of drying fish, theirdogs. No roads to this town, only boats and the memory ofboaters. Blankets made from woodpecker feathers, cattailfluff, cedar bark and dog hair woven into a plaid pattern.At least that's what I remember of the museum's diorama.When the mud came down the mountain and covered the village, no one had lived there for years. It was a boaterwho remembered, after a while, that the village was gone,and also that it had once existed. Archaeologists broughtgarden hoses to wash the mud off and hooked the hoses upto the sea. Some of what had been preserved in the mudwas destroyed that day by the water pressure, and then latermost else was ruined by the wind and rain, but at least fora few weeks they could hold the bones in their hands. Thearchaeologists brought their dogs, they lived there a while.
~~~
Now like the Lady of Shalott,    I dwell within an empty room, And through the day and through the night    I sit before an ancient loom. And like the Lady of Shalott    I look into a mirror wide, Where shadows come, and shadows go,    And ply my shuttle as they glide. Not as she wove the yellow wool,    Ulysses’ wife, Penelope; By day a queen among her maids,    But in the night a woman, she, Who, creeping from her lonely couch,    Unraveled all the slender woof; Or, with a torch, she climbed the towers,    To fire the fagots on the roof! But weaving with a steady hand    The shadows, whether false or true, I put aside a doubt which asks    ‘Among these phantoms what are you?’ For not with altar, tomb, or urn,    Or long-haired Greek with hollow shield, Or dark-prowed ship with banks of oars,    Or banquet in the tented field; Or Norman knight in armor clad,    Waiting a foe where four roads meet; Or hawk and hound in bosky dell,    Where dame and page in secret greet; Or rose and lily, bud and flower,    My web is broidered. Nothing bright Is woven here: the shadows grow    Still darker in the mirror’s light! And as my web grows darker too,    Accursed seems this empty room; For still I must forever weave    These phantoms by this ancient loom.
~~~
      90th and Third, NYC



We almost missed him, although his face,
As blunt as a busy Picasso, all shifting
Planes, was wedged in a picture frame.  
We almost missed him, the way one can stop
Seeing hunched-over bodies along the street
Or a favorite picture above the sofa
In the living room, so familiar it seems
Invisible, until it has drifted askew
Or been removed.  "If only he had something
More contemporary," my companion offered.
The man in the frame extended his crushed
Paper coffee cup, fingers hugging its Greek
Pillars and statues, white and blue.
"Spare any change?" he asked.  I brought
Forth a quarter.  His eyes, brilliant, saidI am a masterpiece.  This is where I live. 
~~~
How lovely it is not to go. To suddenly take ill.
Not seriously ill, just a little under the weather.
To feel slightly peaked, indisposed. Plagued by
a vague ache, or a slight inexplicable chill.
Perhaps such pleasures are denied
to those who never feel obliged. If there are such.
How pleasant to convey your regrets. To feel sincerely
sorry, but secretly pleased to send them on their way
without you. To entrust your good wishes to others.
To spare the equivocal its inevitable rise.
How nice not to hope that something will happen,
but to lie on the couch with a book, hoping that
nothing will. To hear the wood creak and to think.
It is lovely to stay without wanting to leave.
How delicious not to care how you look,
clean and uncombed in the sheets. To sip
brisk mineral water, to take small bites
off crisp Saltines. To leave some on the plate.
To fear no repercussions. Nor dodge
the unkind person you bug.
Even the caretaker has gone to the party.
If you want something you will have to
get it yourself. The blue of the room seduces.
The cars of the occupied sound the wet road.
You indulge in a moment of sadness, make
a frown at the notion you won't be missed.
This is what it is. You have opted to be
forgotten so that your thoughts might live.
 
~~~
Music is most sovereign because more than anything
else, rhythm and harmony find their way to the inmost
soul and take strongest hold upon it, bringing with
them and imparting grace.
—Plato, The Republic 

The cranes are flying ...
—Chekhov 



And here it comes: around the world,
In Chicago, Petersburg, Tokyo, the dancers
Hit the floor running (the communal dancefloor
Here, there, at intervals, sometimes paved,
Sometimes rotted linoleum awash in beer,
Sometimes a field across which the dancers streak
Like violets across grass, sometimes packed dirt
In a township of corrugated metal roofs)
And what was once prescribed ritual, the profuse
Strains of premeditated art, is now improvisation,
The desperately new, where to the sine-curved
Yelps and spasms of police sirens outside
The club, a spasmodic feedback ululates
The death and cremation of history,
Until a boy whose hair is purple spikes,
And a girl wearing a skull
That wants to say I’m cool but I’m in pain,
Get up and dance together, sort of, age thirteen.
Young allegorists, they’ll mime motions
Of shootouts, of tortured ones in basements,
Of cold insinuations before sex
Between enemies, the jubilance of the criminal.
The girl tosses her head and dances
The shoplifter’s meanness and self-betrayal
For a pair of stockings, a scarf, a perfume,
The boy dances stealing the truck,
Shooting his father.
The point is to become a flying viper,
A diving vulva, the great point
Is experiment, like pollen flinging itself
Into far other habitats, or seed
That travels a migrant bird’s gut
To be shit overseas.
The creatures gamble on the whirl of life
And every adolescent body hot
Enough to sweat it out on the dance floor
Is a laboratory: maybe this lipstick, these boots,
These jeans, these earrings, maybe if I flip
My hair and vibrate my pelvis
Exactly synched to the band’s wildfire noise
That imitates history’s catastrophe
Nuke for nuke, maybe I’ll survive,
Maybe we’ll all survive. . . .
At the intersection of poverty and plague
The planet's children—brave, uncontrollable, juiced
Out of their gourds—invent the sacred dance.
~~~
Now I knew I lost her —
Not that she was gone —
But Remoteness travelled
On her Face and Tongue.
Alien, though adjoining
As a Foreign Race —
Traversed she though pausing
Latitudeless Place.
Elements Unaltered —
Universe the same
But Love's transmigration —
Somehow this had come —
Henceforth to remember
Nature took the Day
I had paid so much for —
His is Penury
Not who toils for Freedom
Or for Family
But the Restitution
Of Idolatry.
~~~
Not that I understand things.Angels don’t walk toward the ship, old engravingwhere moon throwsa river of light, how angels would walk the oceanif they wanted to walk.They don’t. They hover. A lot of spacebetween them and whatshines like waves. Which can’tbe a choice, for angels orthe engraver who was in factGustave Doré after sleeping offthe ancient mariner Coleridge left behind underguilt and regret and an albatross’s weight.Which isn’t much, but they arebig animals, four feet across countingthe wind involvedand rain. Doré waking to a room notreally of wings. I guessa stirring, something in the black expansehe hoped to razor intothe copper plate — no, a graver,not a razor at all.Beauty does terrify, a bare nothingbut stop. As in angels. Abrupt.Still, to cut them their flight on metaltakes a while. His hands stiff,Doré under a deadline no doubt like the small endlessly later rest of us do what we do and do until it’s not what we do. Nevertheless, angels. Why did they keep coming, one by one radiant dark of a mind paused to this most desolate given: water at night. That it floods a future not even in the picture.
~~~
Chile, chocolate, coyote, guacamole, mezcal, peyote,
tomato, ocelot, tequila—the words survive months of siege,
240,000 dead in Tenochtitlan. The Place of Herons,
a place of whiteness, did not survive. Duende, a tiny face
in a calla lily, survived. A bowl decorated with scorpion
and pelican survived. Clay faces full of shadow. Sculptors
who understood light, how it addresses the afterlife,
expecting a great dark to fall.
~~~
‘That creep Tolstoy,’ she sobbed.
‘He. . . He. . . couldn’t even. . .’
Something about his brother dying.
The serfs’ punishments
have not ceased to suppurate on their backs.
Woodlots. People. Someone crying
under the yellow
autumn birchgrove drove him
wild: A new set of resolves:
When gambling, that almost obsolete fever,
or three days with the gypsies
sparked him into pure ego, he could,
just the same, write home, ‘Sell them.’
It’s true. ‘Still,’ (someone who loved her said,
cold and firm while she dissolved,hypocrite, in self disgust, lectrice)
‘Still, he kept on. He wrote
all that he wrote; and seems to have understood
better than most of us:
to be human isn’t easy. It’s not
easy to be a serf or a master and learn
that art. It takes nerve. Bastard. Fink.
Yet the grief
trudging behind his funeral, he earned.’
~~~
Immense, entirely itself, it wore that yard like a dress, with limbs low enough for me to enter it and climb the crooked ladder to where I could lean against the trunk and practice being alone. One day, I heard the sound before I saw it, rain fell darkening the sidewalk. Sitting close to the center, not very high in the branches, I heard it hitting the high leaves, and I was happy, watching it happen without it happening to me.
~~~
Rocked in my mother’s pregnant amble,
and born into forty-five years in the dark,
the egg this child was also swayed in the arts
of lovers I took before you, fed with me
 
in the public markets of Baltimore and Denpasar
on oysters and rambutan, woke with me each year
to new waves of wander, fish and flower,
liqueur of each region, and bread of each village,
 
each cup of moonlight in the long sward
between my window and the Wannsee.
The egg he was heard and voices
of everyone I desired and held itself
 
in some deep hormonal bloom,
taking whatever was remarkable
in my life into its possibility.
We learned not to hurry in Balinese rain,
 
to listen for the rumble of wild boar
in the Malvan woods. We climbed
into planes bound for cities we’d never
visit again and skin we’d summon
 
with sobbing. And so, my husband,
as you dream of owning this child,
remember that he has ridden in my fire,
bathed in my blood, and sipped
 
at the breath I drew the first
time I saw what Rodin had clawed
from stone before he turned from Claudel
and went home for dinner and a clean shirt.
 
Remember that this child is collage
of everything before you, frangipani
and escargot, five-for-a-dollar boxes
of macaroni, and French cherries
 
from an old woman in Auvergne
who insisted on the gift
because it was so marvelous
to see a woman traveling alone.
~~~
Sir, I am not a bird of prey:
a Lady does not seize the day.
I trust that brief Time will unfold
our youth, before he makes us old.
How could we two write lines of rhyme
were we not fond of numbered Time
and grateful to the vast and sweet
trials his days will make us meet?
The Grave's not just the body's curse;
no skeleton can pen a verse!
So while this numbered World we see,
let's sweeten Time with poetry,
and Time, in turn, may sweeten Love
and give us time our love to prove.
You've praised my eyes, forehead, breast:
you've all our lives to praise the rest.
~~~
Take any desired height, or place points for
top of head and heels. Divide into eights. . . .
 



8.  Head tilted back between the headboard slats. Eyes glass boxes
     filling up with light. Later, drained to a blue-gray, the color of
     good government.
 
7.  Thus, we see that commodification is a function of local necessity.
     a.  As Angelenos collect percolating shade in shallow pans, to
          leach the arsenic out of the light.
     b.  “And then I buried it.”
          “Where, exactly? And when?”
          “In the chest. Insertion point at the base of the throat. You
          were still asleep.”
          “But what is it, exactly? I mean, I can’t figure out its precise
          extent. I mean, I can feel it there sometimes, like stitches, or
          sometimes like a flanged or branching bone.”
 
6.  Cross-hatchings of street noise and the Minotaur with his boy’s
     body. Narrowing. Rib cage the verge of a canoe. Armpit a whiff of
     pencil lead.
 
5.  “If you want to fuck me with that bottle, Mr. Arbuckle, best take
     the foil off first.”
 
4.  osculation:
     a.  The act of kissing. A kiss.
     b.  Math. A point where two branches of a curve have a common
          tangent and extend in both directions of the tangent.
     c.  To the ankles. Or to the knees. Or just unzipped enough.
 
3.  Charmeuse chemise. A shuddering fall. Miss Adelaide Hall on
     the chaise longue singing I ain’t much caring / Just where I will     end. Then jerked upright, skirt hiked to the knee, that bridge
     stretching out under every skip-step. Slaphappy scat-puppet of
     the fixed smile, the meanwhile, Ain’t got nobody to love now.
 
2.  The bone begging bowl. The foot that pushed it away.
 
1.  “I want to leave you exactly as I found you.”
~~~
‘This is the key which was given by the angel Michael to Pali, and by Pali to Moses. If “thou canst read it, then shalt thou understand the words of men, … the whistling of birds, the language of date-trees, the unity of hearts, ... nay, even the thoughts of the rains.”’ Gleanings after the Talmud 



Ah! could I read Schemhammphorasch, The wondrous keynote of the world, What voices could I always hear From tempests, with their black wings furled, That on the sudden west winds steer, And, muttering low their awful song, Or pealing through the mountains strong, Robe all the skies with sheeted fire; That pour from heaven a rushing river, That bid the hill-tops bow and quiver, Mad with some fierce and wild desire. The dreadful anthem of the wind, That sweeps through forests as a plow, That lays the greensward heaped below, Would chant its meaning to my mind, And I could tell the tale to man In words that burn and glow with splendor; Then should the whole wide sky surrender Its hidden voice, its wondrous plan, Asleep since earliest time began; And all my soul, most like a blaze That burns the branches whence it springeth, Should flame to heaven in mightier lays Than any mortal poet singeth, If I could read Schemhammphorasch. If I could read Schemhammphorasch, When little birds are softly singing, Or twitter from their greenwood nests, Where safe and still the mother rests; Or else, upon the glad wind springing, Send up their tender morning song; Then should I know their secret blisses, The thrill of life and love they feel When summer’s sun their bright heads kisses, Or summer’s winds about them steal. Or, listening to the early blossoms That are so fleeting and so fair, With perfume sighing from their bosoms Its incense on the gracious air, I think that I should hear a prayer So sweet, so patient, and so lowly, That mortal words most pure and rare Would scarce unveil its meaning holy. From forests whence the murmurous leaves Breathe their content in rustling quiver, Or droop when any rain-wind grieves, Or where some broad and brimming river O’erflowing to the mighty sea, Sings the proud joy of destiny, The glad acclaim of life and breath; The courage of confronted death; Ah! what a rapturous, glorious song Should seize with bliss this earthly throng, If I could read Schemhammphorasch! If I could read Schemhammphorasch, Then should I know the souls of men, Too deep for any other ken; I could translate the silent speech Of glittering eye and knotted brow, Though still the wily tongue might teach A different script with voice and vow. The blood that runs in traitorous veins; The breath that gasps with hope or fear; The stifled sigh, the hidden tear; The death-pang of immortal pains, That hide their mortal agony, Would have their own low voice for me; Their tale of hate and misery, Their sob of passion and despair, Their sacred love, their frantic prayer. My soul would be the listening priest To hear confession far and near, And woe and want from first to least Would shriek its utterance in my ear. Ah, could I bear to live and hear These cries that heaven itself might flee, These terrors heaven alone may see, If I could read Schemhammphorasch? If I could read Schemhammphorasch, My brain would burn with such a fire As lights the awful cherubim; My heart would burst with woe and ire, My flesh would shrivel and expire; Yea! God himself grow far and dim. I cannot hold the boundless sea In one small chalice lent to me; I cannot grasp the starry sky In one weak hand, and bid it lie Where I would have a canopy; I cannot hate and love together; I cannot poise the heavy world, Or hear its hiss through chaos hurled, Or stay the falling of a feather. No, not if Michael came once more, Standing upon the sea and shore, And held his right hand down to me, That I that awful word might see, And learn to read its lesson dread. My soul in dust would bow her head, Mine eyes would close, my lips would say, ‘Oh, Master! take thy gift away: Leave me to live my little day In peace and trust while yet I may. For could I live, or love, or pray, If I could read Schemhammphorasch?’
~~~
The number of corners in the soul can't
compare with the universe's dimensions folded
neatly into swans. In the soul's
space, one word on a thousand pieces
of paper the size of cookie fortunes falls
from the heavens. At last, the oracular
answer, you cry, pawing at the scraps that twirl
like seed-pod helicopters. Alas, the window
to your soul needs a good scrubbing, so
the letters doodle into indecipherables just
like every answer that has rained
down through history, and you realize, in
your little smog of thought that death
will simply be the cessation of asking, a thousand
cranes unfolding themselves and returning to the trees.
~~~
   1 But I was thinking today about our conversation earlier in the summer. Exhausted, you lay your head on the kitchen table and said: “But what’s the difference between a monster and a cyborg? I need something to eat. Do you have any chocolate?” Opening the fridge, I said quietly and perhaps too seriously, trying to impress you: “The monster is that being who refuses to adapt to her circumstances.” Her fate. Her body. Great Britain. You said: “So, is Laloo English or British?” I said: “She’s from London.” But the more I said London, the more it sounded like a joke. LondonLondonLondon.
   2 I was thinking today about what happens when you keep going in a car. This is something you can only do here. Wish for something. Did you ever do it? Wish you weren’t there? I want that go on, go even though it is unclear to me what happens when you get to the Panama Canal or Idaho. Hitchhiking in Idaho as a veritable child, I was taken in by a farming couple, Fatty and Daddy, a hundred miles or so outside of Boise. Fatty was rail thin, about seventy-five, and Daddy was a big man who had a reclining chair in each room and looked younger than his wife. They picked me up in their truck—I was sitting by the side of the road brushing the knots out of my hair with my fingers—and I stayed with them for five days. They said it was not the right thing for me to be in the open like that, and they took me to eat every day at a restaurant called Country Buffet. In my innocence, I had been walking on a road that led to the country compound of a KKK leader/operative, Charles Reynold. What is an operative? It is someone who is always planning a way in, like the hen-house fox with his beautifully red, bushy tail. Daddy, Fatty, and I hunkered down until Daddy’s nephew, Robert, stopped by on his way through nowhere and gave me a ride to Boise proper, where there was a bus station. I waited until Robert had gone and then I walked out to the main drag to get a cup of coffee and interview murderers. “I can take you as far as the state line.” “That would be lovely.” Obsessed, far from home with its gooseberry patches and grim professions based upon openings at Heathrow Airport or Nestle, the main employers in the dingy part of northwest London that constituted my origins, I said yes. Soft yes to the color green, which is going.
   3 That is a tree (going) but also an ocean: a way of being saturated with color that only happens here in your country for me; for you it might happen in another place. Mine. Like Laloo, I lived for many years on an island with congested traffic flows. Thus, a juniper tree flying by the window, intensely blue, or the Atlantic Ocean, to the left, if the car has a destination to the south, such as to The Keys, is magical to me. Improbable in light of my origins. Hers. The girl in the car. I don’t know. I am writing to you, in your special writing dress made from scraps of lace as if it (the dress, the morning of writing ahead of you) is a café; as if, writing, you are hypnotizing not only the biologies of strangers and friends but also yourself. For this reason, when I think of you reading, I think of you as writing blindly. You read but you are also writing. As if my own eyes were closed, I see your white books floating in the sky above my painting of the red girl. These books are separate from my own work, here in the salt-water notebook, but they communicate with it in a nonlocal sense. Like birds.
   4 This is pre but the notebook is after. Soaked already at the edge and foamy. Past future. Writing on the warp when dry. Pages. Entries by hand. That is the morning I woke up and walked to the Pacific Ocean, after a night in a motel in Florence, Oregon, complete with a dodgy door and the reality of pillows. The woman at the front desk was wearing a very pretty apron with purple and yellow flowers on it. An expatriate, she said exaggeratedly, oblivious to our common origin: “About four miles. You’re not going to walk, are you? Do you have an umbrella? You can’t go out like that, ducky.”
   5 I walked towards the sound of something roaring in a day, the kind of day that is like darkness but lit up, on its forested, proximal verge by gorse, which is a bright yellow flower. Citron-yellow and a kind of tin or silver roofing with holes in it. The day. Like walking in a dreamed landscape drenched with the wrong rain. Monsoon. What kind of rain is this? I recognized the immensity but not the temperature. This was monstrous: the inability to assimilate, on the level of the senses, an ordinary experience of weather. Here is the tongue, for example, constantly darting out to feel the air: what is it? Is it summer? Is it a different season? It’s a different day. That’s okay. Damaged from her travels, in some sense unsettled, enormously anxious, a girl does it anway: gets up and goes. It’s as if the day has a memory of her and not the other way around.
~~~
1
I keep placing my hands over
my face, the fingertips just
resting on the place where I feel
my eyebrows and the fine end
of a bone. My eyes are covered
with the blood of my hands, my
palms hold
my jaws. I do this at dinner.
My daughter asksAre you all right?
and by a common miracle
when I smile
she knows I am.
             2
I ask her what she will do
after we eat. Sleep she
tells me. But I will clean
the deer skull, wash it.
             3
You gave me this skull in the woods
told me to bring it clean
and tell the story I had told you
before, about how the deer had
come to me, and I said I would.
             4
And I put this skull on an old
newspaper, pulled the lower part
of the jaws free, touched it first
carefully, as if it would fall apart
in my hands, the bone paper-
thin, and then I saw I could
scrub, so brushed the surface with
steel and my fingers and more
and more this surface became
familiar to me.
             5
I wanted to see the lines of it
what it would be if it had been
polished by the wind, the water,
and my hands, these agents making
the skull more itself.
Slowly I was not afraid at all
and my fingers went into the deepest
holes of this thing, not afraid
for myself or it, feeling
suddenly as if cleaning this
small fragment of earth away
from the crevices inside was
like loving.
            6
But it was when I touched the place
where the eyes were that I knew
this was the shell of the deer that had
lived here, this was this deer
and not this deer, her home and
now empty of her, but not
empty of her, I knew also, not
empty of her, as my hands
trembled.
            7
And in that instant remembered you
had been in that body of
that deer dying, what
does it feel like to be a deer
dying, the death consumes
you like birth, you are
nowhere else but in the center.
            8
Remembering those gentle deer
that watched me as I wept,
or the deer that leapt as if
out of my mind, when I saw
speaking there in that green place
the authority of the heart
and the deer of the woods where
my feet stood, stared at me until
I whispered to her and cried
at her presence.
            9
And when I cleaned the skull
I washed myself and sat
my body half out of the water
and put my hands again over
my face, my fingers edging the
bone over my eyes, and I thought
how good this feels and this
is a gesture you make.
            10
Tell this story of the deer’s skull
you asked quietly and so I
came in my own time to put
these words carefully here
slowly listing each motion
on this thin paper
as fragile and as tough
as knowledge.
               1978
~~~
In a visually spectacular dream some
years back, I took Paul Klee’s posthumous
class in poetry and painting. What luck to
be swept with the elect across the ocean
that night to environs that could only
be by Klee. Klee? you protest. Surely
the dreamer is everyone in her dream.
~~~
What thou lov’st well shall not be reft from thee;  
What thou lov’st well is thy true heritage.        
          Ezra Pound



You’ll find labels describing what is gone:
an empress’s bones, a stolen painting
 
of a man in a feathered helmet
holding a flag-draped spear.
 
A vellum gospel, hidden somewhere long ago
forgotten, would have sat on that pedestal;
 
this glass cabinet could have kept the first
salts carried back from the Levant.
 
To help us comprehend the magnitude
of absence, huge rooms
 
lie empty of their wonders—the Colossus,
Babylon’s Hanging Gardens and
 
in this gallery, empty shelves enough to hold
all the scrolls of Alexandria.
 
My love, I’ve petitioned the curator
who has acquired an empty chest
 
representing all the poems you will
now never write. It will be kept with others
 
in the poet’s gallery. Next door,
a vacant room echoes with the spill
 
of jewels buried by a pirate who died
before disclosing their whereabouts.
 
I hope you don’t mind, but I have kept
a few of your pieces
 
for my private collection. I think
you know the ones I mean.
~~~
Look deep into the blueberry eyes of  breakfast.
~~~
The alcove of your arm
has become my favorite room
for sleep, but I’ve been roused
by nightmares lately. Even thunderstorms
couldn’t wake you
~~~
Matisse, too, when the fingers ceased to work,
Worked larger and bolder, his primary colors celebrating
The weddings of innocence and glory, innocence and glory
Monet when the cataracts blanketed his eyes
Painted swirls of rage, and when his sight recovered
Painted water lilies, Picasso claimedI do not seek, I find, and stuck to that story
About himself, and made that story stick.
Damn the fathers. We are talking about defiance.
~~~
Everyone in the room is cheering.
This is what you do for a painting you love!
We climb up on one another’s shoulders,
wave pom-poms that match the palette.
We want to buy the season tickets to the train
that huffs through this landscape. We want
to climb the towers of this steely sculpture
and hang the flag. Victory is ours! We have
seen something to love here. Outside the gallery,
there is an alley full of garbage. Beauty stops
at the door. A scraggly tree is coming out
of the pavement where the people are lined
up, cigarettes and cell phones, waiting
for a chance to look. They keep their
giant fingers in their bags. Wear T-shirts
of their favorite teams of artist assistants.
On the alley wall, someone has drawn
a hillside and a horse. A young man sits
on a crate and peels the glue from under
his nails. He nods. And looks. And soon,
pulls out the chalk and adds a saddle
and a man, who looks back and shouts
as if he has found his enemy again.
 
~~~
Insanity is not a want of reason. It is reason's overgrowth, a calculating kudzu. Explaining why, in two-ton manifesti, thinkers sally forth with testaments and pipe bombs. Heaven help us: spare us all your meaningful designs. Shine down or shower forth, but (for the earthling's sake) ignore all prayers followed by against, or for. Teach us to bear life's senselessness, our insignificance, and more; let's call that sanity. The terrifying prospect isn't some escapist with a novel, fond of comfort, munching sweets— it is the busy hermeneut, so serious he's sour, intent on making meaning of us all, and bursting from the towers to the streets.
~~~
Often rebuked, yet always back returning    To those first feelings that were born with me,And leaving busy chase of wealth and learning    For idle dreams of things which cannot be:To-day, I will seek not the shadowy region;    Its unsustaining vastness waxes drear;And visions rising, legion after legion,    Bring the unreal world too strangely near.I’ll walk, but not in old heroic traces,    And not in paths of high morality,And not among the half-distinguished faces,    The clouded forms of long-past history.I’ll walk where my own nature would be leading:    It vexes me to choose another guide:Where the gray flocks in ferny glens are feeding;    Where the wild wind blows on the mountain side.What have those lonely mountains worth revealing?    More glory and more grief than I can tell:The earth that wakes one human heart to feeling    Can centre both the worlds of Heaven and Hell. 
~~~
On opening a long unopened book,what odor rises from the parting pages,what genie is released, what dark spell broken,as if some spirit trapped inside for ages,By this hinge swung open were set free?My father’s hand has jotted in the marginsits own blunt text of what must belecture notes, and planted his place markerLike a flag among “The Dry Salvages”—a UC
~~~
I dredge allegedly
to repair and upgrade the Port of Umm Qasr
I edge a legibly duty free
transrational contract drag
well I pledge alien
lesions will be doled
expensively (not on the cheap)
and not to um miss explosives
who shell
Bechtel by the—that is Shell it by the
shore Bechtel sells
unflaggingly to the drag of the dividend
rates of America I pluck allegiance from
an estimated 1.8 billion
and to the executive committee—
Chicago—the world’s fair—and to Columbus
Day in the park—I think it was the fourth of the
reprivate which it hands
to the drooling class—I mean the measuring
cache watch this base—I a semifree colonist in gall—
and to the elect by which it assesses,
and to the electric by which it stands, and erects, th—
rederegulated privates, bow, get down: how
much would be chucked if this versus
then forest of Arden
should burn in the name of the national hamlet—
if it be true that good wine needs no bush,
we’d choose once we got behind the curtain, we guessed,
if it’s there anymore except
in Geist . . . while one gush mail addles in accidental
against its—when walking Tokyo—wonderful
you caming to OOIOO show & I
Ill put you on the just list—
this against—flurry of
finger-pointing—forget it
and your phony numbers like in why two okeydoke
take it, one ration under planes—
Apaches, syllabled to us versus shame—
one galaxy under goods, world’s-without-end fair
under the indivisible party, beneath security, below
God’s belts to humanity, with
puberty and enduring as-is and no trial for troglodytes and dogs and
tax treats for by for
allegiance. The friction has its machine—as you choose it?
~~~
After Hieronymus Bosch, “The Garden of Earthly Delights,” triptych right panel



But all dark notes are dismantled
there from the middle ear
downward. Voyaged mind, cauldron skin.
Can you claim anything is yours?
The burning salt hour
throws its black broken-glass frame skyward.
Left behind
the mum orchestra, body parts in peril
and animals dizzy for
lust past all lost
astronomy and wipeout,
this naked edible overjoy, a kind
of suicide in syllables, fifth
panic, fourth stall’s birds-fermata, this
half ocean’s susurrus is coming over us in the picture.
Can you akin? Can you
hear it, pinned to the unseasonable underearth,
an option for music and water
constantly changing shape, an answer
in dissonance? To hear desire
is to wake yourself inside, upturned,
long enough to know
tomorrow is exile. Chaos, body harp,
and painted butt music, crowd-crawl, rose
crowned to the chest, rabbit
call and playing cards    ...    listen,
I’m hell-humming in
your direction, giddy, I am too taken
to leave it alone, the will
locked in as if it is already
inside of me now: to fall.
Let’s be clear,
my darling, in the reeling
crave, spilled gut-platter
of enclosed bones, in
the final flesh-clean drop, it sounds
like fire rising
with the cliff’s updraft.
~~~
In the old, scratched, cheap wood of the typing stand
there is a landscape, veined, which only a child can see
or the child’s older self, a poet,
a woman dreaming when she should be typing
the last report of the day. If this were a map,
she thinks, a map laid down to memorize
because she might be walking it, it shows
ridge upon ridge fading into hazed desert
here and there a sign of aquifers
and one possible watering-hole. If this were a map
it would be the map of the last age of her life,
not a map of choices but a map of variations
on the one great choice. It would be the map by which
she could see the end of touristic choices,
of distances blued and purpled by romance,
by which she would recognize that poetry
isn’t revolution but a way of knowing
why it must come. If this cheap, mass-produced
wooden stand from the Brooklyn Union Gas Co.,
mass-produced yet durable, being here now,
is what it is yet a dream-map
so obdurate, so plain,
she thinks, the material and the dream can join
and that is the poem and that is the late report.October/November 1987
~~~
                                                                                                                                                                                                         I had the happy idea to fasten a bicycle wheel
                                                                                                                                                                                                    to a kitchen stool and watch it turn.  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                —DUCHAMP




I had the happy idea to suspend some blue globes in the air
and watch them pop.
I had the happy idea to put my little copper horse on the shelf so we could stare at each other
all evening.
I had the happy idea to create a void in myself.
Then to call it natural.
Then to call it supernatural.
I had the happy idea to wrap a blue scarf around my head and spin.
I had the happy idea that somewhere a child was being born who was nothing like Helen or
Jesus except in the sense of changing everything.
I had the happy idea that someday I would find both pleasure and punishment, that I would
know them and feel them,
and that, until I did, it would be almost as good to pretend.
I had the happy idea to call myself happy.
I had the happy idea that the dog digging a hole in the yard in the twilight had his nose deep in
mold-life.
I had the happy idea that what I do not understand is more real than what I do,
and then the happier idea to buckle myself
into two blue velvet shoes.
I had the happy idea to polish the reflecting glass and say
hello to my own blue soul. Hello, blue soul. Hello. 
It was my happiest idea.
~~~
I would have come.
When you called. But.
I had the most beautiful pale pink rose.
Its healthy stem was clenched between my teeth. And.
Its thorns bit sharply into my tender wet flesh. So.
 
I couldn't answer you. Still.
My lips moved at you silently.
They offered words you never heard.
They screamed inside my crazed brain. Only.
It could do nothing for you.
 
In time the petals wilted.
They blew away. And.
They became compost in someone else's garden.
The tough, fibrous stem withered.
I bit down hard to snap its grip on me. Then.
 
My teeth fell out.
Its thorns had burrowed into my cheeks.
They had implanted themselves permanently.
They were suckling on my softest tissues. And.
Not long after they sprouted tiny shoots.
 
They coiled their way down.
I still held the memory of your call. And.
The long stemmed beauty lodged next to it.
They cleaved unto the long roots curling down my neck.
My body held tight and listened. Hard.
~~~
After the offending bit is popped out
these tiny stitches on your neck
are exquisite. Lips of the slit
don’t speak the way you think they should,
break into stupid song, blow kisses
at the doctor. Some piece
that kept insisting on itself
will spend a few weeks in a jar on holiday
with strangers, stained and diced
and separated neatly
from its secrets. You can only
wait, reading your book about the sex
lives of the saints, the lance
that pierced and then pulled slowly out
of Saint Teresa’s heart. A slice
is venerated in Milan, they say, an arm
in Lisbon, a single breast in Rome;
but her heart’s enthroned
behind the convent walls at Avila. Pink
under glass, it wears a tiny crown.
~~~
Inexplicable, the sign outside a deli scrawled
with FLOWERS
                                 and below that: ALWAYS.
But there were no flowers. And I have never
seen an Always. I would like to,
                                              and I have looked.
I have kept my eye keen
                                        for Always, have liked
its idea like an expensive purse, coveting it as
it appears,
            riding the arms of rich ladies who are
so very lady.                      I've rolled on velvet
            cushions where I heard Always slept,
and I once tried to kiss Always,
                  but I don't think it was the Always
I was looking for.
I like your Always, it looks
such a demanding pet. It looks like it kisses
nice and soft.
                         It looks like the bruise I found
flowering on my knee.
                                    I fell down at your voice.
Not to worry, I got right back up, walked ten
more blocks
                     and by then I was halfway home.
I knock my knees blue
                                         and scabbed crawling
toward you, wanting flowers,
                               and always, always, always
to slide against the cold vinyl of a car's seat,
your pale hands
                            on the bare backs of my legs,
that's one Always I want, and whoever knew
there were so many species
                              of Always? Your bare hands
on the pale backs
                            of my thighs, printing bruise,
and if you said Flowers, said Always and we
could erect a forever
                                    of something like sheets
                         and breakfast and an ordinary
day, my eyes would
                always slide across the table toward
you,
       to warm their twin marbles in your palm,
my face would flower
                          for you daily, so that when we
die, roses might petal
                                themselves out our throats.
~~~
Bear in mind, my little man:
Never let your verses scan.
And acceptance will be sparse
If, by any chance, they parse.
But whatever else you do,
Let it not be said of you
That your poetry makes sense!. . . .That’s a criminal offense!
 
~~~
A Sestina



We are the smiling comfortable homes With happy families enthroned therein, Where baby souls are brought to meet the world, Where women end their duties and desires, For which men labor as the goal of life, That people worship now instead of God. Do we not teach the child to worship God? — Whose soul’s young range is bounded by the homes Of those he loves, and where he learns that life Is all constrained to serve the wants therein, Domestic needs and personal desires, — These are the early limits of his world. And are we not the woman’s perfect world, Prescribed by nature and ordained of God, Beyond which she can have no right desires, No need for service other than in homes? For doth she not bring up her young therein? And is not rearing young the end of life? And man? What other need hath he in life Than to go forth and labor in the world, And struggle sore with other men therein? Not to serve other men, nor yet his God, But to maintain these comfortable homes, – The end of all a normal man’s desires. Shall not the soul’s most measureless desires Learn that the very flower and fruit of life Lies all attained in comfortable homes, With which life’s purpose is to dot the world And consummate the utmost will of God, By sitting down to eat and drink therein. Yea, in the processes that work therein —   Fulfilment of our natural desires —   Surely man finds the proof that mighty God For to maintain and reproduce his life Created him and set him in the world; And this high end is best attained in homes. Are we not homes? And is not all therein? Wring dry the world to meet our wide desires! We crown all life! We are the aim of God!
~~~
and on the waves in turmoil
in the harbor
gulls floated
like pieces of paper
set adrift, little
boat-like birds
twirling
in the wind-tossed waves
that drove into
the strong arms of the seawall
at the apex of the bay
where a statue of Sappho stands,
young woman
with a lyre—not
looking out to sea
but glancing at the curve
of the seawall
and the birds,
those lost notes
before rain
~~~
“It took the herd six hours,”
the Blue Planet voiceover explains,
orcas pushing a blue whale calf
under. Keet, our son points
at the screen, naming them all
one whale, from the greek kētos,
water-monster, “The seas bathed
in calf’s blood.” More, our son
asks, More okean, watches the red
beneath them spreading, More ocean.
“Killer whales,” the voice reminds,
the blue calf’s heart bigger
than all three of ours, its blood could fill
our son’s bathtub for weeks. The orcas
only eat the head, let the rest sink
to the ocean floor, but no, the voice
points out how body born six thousand pounds
lands on the skeleton of a full grown blue,
“Nothing gets wasted in the water.”Look, our son staring, Look,
learning how the deep devours,
blubber separates from bone,
even bone won’t survive long,
eaten by water worms and salt.
Spicy, our son calls any intense
flavor, tears in his mouth, but no,
not over this, the calf’s
blood or its bones, the orcas
swimming through reddened salt,
but over desire, he wants
what he cannot have
or doesn’t want what he is
given, a calf’s heart
in the teeth of a hungrier mammal,
because what else is worth
that much salt?
 
~~~
The truth is, I’ve never cared for the National
Anthem. If you think about it, it’s not a good
song. Too high for most of us with “the rockets
red glare” and then there are the bombs.
(Always, always, there is war and bombs.)
Once, I sang it at homecoming and threw
even the tenacious high school band off key.
But the song didn’t mean anything, just a call
to the field, something to get through before
the pummeling of youth. And what of the stanzas
we never sing, the third that mentions “no refuge
could save the hireling and the slave”? Perhaps,
the truth is, every song of this country
has an unsung third stanza, something brutal
snaking underneath us as we blindly sing
the high notes with a beer sloshing in the stands
hoping our team wins. Don’t get me wrong, I do
like the flag, how it undulates in the wind
like water, elemental, and best when it’s humbled,
brought to its knees, clung to by someone who
has lost everything, when it’s not a weapon,
when it flickers, when it folds up so perfectly
you can keep it until it’s needed, until you can
love it again, until the song in your mouth feels
like sustenance, a song where the notes are sung
by even the ageless woods, the short-grass plains,
the Red River Gorge, the fistful of land left
unpoisoned, that song that’s our birthright,
that’s sung in silence when it’s too hard to go on,
that sounds like someone’s rough fingers weaving
into another’s, that sounds like a match being lit
in an endless cave, the song that says my bones
are your bones, and your bones are my bones,
and isn’t that enough?
~~~
You can’t imagine what it’s like here. In her past
life, she was a clandestine operator in ancient
Egypt. In a past life she had her heart ripped out,
ritual sacrifice. We all know what that
means, right, to have your heart ripped out. Torn
from the body, one’s “own” body, alive and torn.
 
 
The unspeaking speaker. The man coughs.
Orientation. Two bells, a motorcar on the
street, on-lookers. H22-3416. Men, maybe
four, inside. Vast numbers of people, faces
turned to the east. Four nurses holding four
swaddled babes, four bottles.
 
 
Six men walking forward on a country road
all wearing suits, coats, vests and ties. Upon
his shoulders, one of the men carries a man with
no legs. The man with no legs is wearing a
bathrobe. In a landscape a train passes from
top right to bottom left. People are packed inside
as well as on the roof and holding on at the sides.
 
 
One man, naked, his back turned to the
window, light on inside. A bird in a cage hung
on a hook at the top left-hand corner of the
window. A man in profile to the left, eyes closed
mouth open wide, singing. Or thought he was
singing. He did. Or we did. The back of a chair and
three tall mirrors. At their focal point a woman
stands, arms akimbo. She’s wearing evening dress
black high heels, long white gown, long black
gloves, necklace, earrings.
 
 
Outside the bakery, a horse-drawn hearse
approaches. A woman in an apron tests green grapes
eating them before placing bunches in a wooden
crate. Inside a Quonset hut, there’s a long
table with men sitting in chairs writing or paying
attention to one man standing at the table, hands
in the pockets of his jumpsuit. Shirtless men seated
on the floor, some on towels or blankets, are doing
exercises. Friday afternoon, cold grim day. We meet
in the museum, at a picture called “Birmingham.”
 
 
Sign on exterior wall saying “WELCOME.”
~~~
The happy ones are almost always also vulgar; happiness has a way of thinking that's rushed and has no time to look but keeps on moving, compact and manic, with contempt in passing for the dying: Get on with your life, come on, buck up! Those stilled by pain don't mix with the cheerful, self-assured runners but with those who walk at the same slow pace. If one wheel locks and the other's turning the turning one doesn't stop turning but goes as far as it can, dragging the other in a poor, skewed race until the cart either comes to a halt or falls apart.
~~~
is that you can never see the one you're wearing,
that no one believes the lies they tell,
that they grow to be more famous than you,
that you could die in one but you won't be buried in it.
That we use them to create dogs
in our own image. That the dogs
in their mortarboards and baseball caps and veils
crush our hubris with their unconcern.
That Norma Desmond's flirty cocktail hat flung aside
left a cowlick that doomed her. That two old ladies
catfighting in Hutzler's Better Dresses both wore flowered
straw. Of my grandmother the amateur hatmaker,
this legend: that the holdup man at the Mercantile
turned to say Madam I love your hat before
he shot the teller dead who'd giggled at her
homemade velvet roses. O happy tragedy of hats!
That they make us mimic classic gestures,
inspiring pleasure first, then pity and then fear.
See how we tip them, hold them prettily against the wind
or pull them off and mop our sweaty brows
like our beloved foolish dead in photographs.
Like farmers plowing under the ancient sun.
~~~
Empty air has its own mechanism, me dijo. 
Its gears accord to whim.
 
We go out only when we have to, me dijo. 
We have hidden things for breathing.
 
You can't understand it prepped that way, me dijo. 
It always changes, but never readily enough.
 
Some things we say more of and then again, me dijo. 
They always mean less once pre-written.
 
The context connections are far too frail, me dijo. 
To make them you need to pixel-point time.
 
There are no click-in-n-out pictures, me dijo. 
You facet your eyes to see them multiply.
 
There are hands held out everywhere, me dijo. 
We have to be careful what to step around/in.
 
Sometimes we come this close too late, me dijo. 
Then we have to wait for inertia to embrace us.
 
We are the hungry, hungry: so ravenous, me dijo. 
We will tear at your insides and lick them clean.
~~~
Shoot in 16 mm film, capture her sitting underan olive-green archway.              Loop the sound of steel striking glass. When you blink, the camera captures the frame of her kin, walking upside down.              Loop the sound of tundra grass sprouting.Her hairline marks her shift        from caribou to woman. Standing in front of three white spotlights the silhouette of five black arrowheads departs from her lips.              Splice together her eyelashes and               frozen lids        exaggerate the strain               of her freckles coiled into song.Inukshuks tumble from the tips of her fingernails guiding the landing strip for twin otters; they watch their children travel to the moon,               or perhaps they erase our oiled webs.              Chart sixteen luminaries into the Beaufort Sea.                                            Wait.     Wait.        Wait.                             The shutter will remember                                            their white crested etchings.They resurface in the lyric of your documentary.
~~~
(Too sound of mind)



The paper table cloth was tastefully bleak,
The misty morning light shone on his cheek,
And made him look alone and masculine.
He talked of Seneca and bad translations,
Of modern critics' lightweight observations;
A bread crumb rested sweetly on his chin.
Behind him, through the glass, the ocean's heave
Uncurled against the sand, beside his sleeve,
As Eros aimed his toxic javelin.
I ducked out of the way, to no avail;
It glanced my flesh, injecting quite a cocktail
That blurred my sight and caused my head to spin—
Never mind the coffee we were drinking,
Whatever I said was not what I was thinking.
I wanted to become his mandolin,
And lie across his lap, a dainty lute,
And sing to him and feed him ripened fruit,
While light upon the sea turned opaline.
Instead, this conversation about art
And formal education—God, he's smart!
Such rationality should be a sin.
The hour was up, he had to run, of course;
A handshake and a peck of shy remorse—
Outside, the sea was gray and dull as tin;
It ruled the shore with tedious discipline.
~~~
Perfectly round.
                      Perfectly black.
No. . . not entirely black.
He has that bluish-white at the edge of his eyes
And his beautiful lips
Open upon a smile of expensive pearls.
*       *       *
Round and dusky-headed,
Round bellied
Black baby, fearlessly
Offer your unpristine hand to the daylight,
Say hello, fearlessly, to your life.
~~~
It is said that playing cards were invented in 1392 to cure the French king, Charles VI, of madness. The suits in some of the first card packs consisted of Doves, Peacocks, Ravens, and Owls.



They say I am excitable! How could
I not scream? The Swiss monk’s tonsure
spun till it blurred yet his eyes were still.
I snapped my gaiter, hard, to stuff back
my mirth. Lords, he then began to speak.Indus catarum, he said, presenting the game of cards
in which the state of the world is excellent described
and figured.
~~~
I was born in Boston in
1949. I never wanted
this fact to be known, in
fact I’ve spent the better
half of my adult life
trying to sweep my early
years under the carpet
and have a life that
was clearly just mine
and independent of
the historic fate of
my family. Can you
imagine what it was
like to be one of them,
to be built like them,
to talk like them
to have the benefits
of being born into such
a wealthy and powerful
American family. I went
to the best schools,
had all kinds of tutors
and trainers, traveled
widely, met the famous,
the controversial, and
the not-so-admirable
and I knew from
a very early age that
if there were ever any
possibility of escaping
the collective fate of this famous
Boston family I would
take that route and
I have. I hopped
on an Amtrak to New
York in the early
‘70s and I guess
you could say
my hidden years
began. I thought
Well I’ll be a poet.
What could be more
foolish and obscure.
I became a lesbian.
Every woman in my
family looks like
a dyke but it’s really
stepping off the flag
when you become one.
While holding this ignominious
pose I have seen and
I have learned and
I am beginning to think
there is no escaping
history. A woman I
am currently having
an affair with said
you know  you look
like a Kennedy. I felt
the blood rising in my
cheeks. People have
always laughed at
my Boston accent
confusing “large” for
“lodge,” “party”
for “potty.” But
when this unsuspecting
woman invoked for
the first time my
family name
I knew the jig
was up. Yes, I am,
I am a Kennedy.
My attempts to remain
obscure have not served
me well. Starting as
a humble poet I
quickly climbed to the
top of my profession
assuming a position of
leadership and honor.
It is right that a
woman should call
me out now. Yes,
I am a Kennedy.
And I await
your orders.
You are the New Americans.
The homeless are wandering
the streets of our nation’s
greatest city. Homeless
men with AIDS are among
them. Is that right?
That there are no homes
for the homeless, that
there is no free medical
help for these men. And women.
That they get the message
—as they are dying—
that this is not their home?
And how are your
teeth today? Can
you afford to fix them?
How high is your rent?
If art is the highest
and most honest form
of communication of
our times and the young
artist is no longer able
to move here to speak
to her time…Yes, I could,
but that was 15 years ago
and remember—as I must
I am a Kennedy.
Shouldn’t we all be Kennedys?
This nation’s greatest city
is home of the business-
man and home of the
rich artist. People with
beautiful teeth who are not
on the streets. What shall
we do about this dilemma?
Listen, I have been educated.
I have learned about Western
Civilization. Do you know
what the message of Western
Civilization is? I am alone.
Am I alone tonight?
I don’t think so. Am I
the only one with bleeding gums
tonight. Am I the only
homosexual in this room
tonight. Am I the only
one whose friends have
died, are dying now.
And my art can’t
be supported until it is
gigantic, bigger than
everyone else’s, confirming
the audience’s feeling that they are
alone. That they alone
are good, deserved
to buy the tickets
to see this Art.
Are working,
are healthy, should
survive, and are
normal. Are you
normal tonight? Everyone
here, are we all normal.
It is not normal for
me to be a Kennedy.
But I am no longer
ashamed, no longer
alone. I am not
alone tonight because
we are all Kennedys.
And I am your President.
 
~~~
          1.

 

After dark, stars glisten like ice, and the distance they span

Hides something elemental. Not God, exactly. More like

Some thin-hipped glittering Bowie-being—a Starman

Or cosmic ace hovering, swaying, aching to make us see.

And what would we do, you and I, if we could know for sure

 

That someone was there squinting through the dust,

Saying nothing is lost, that everything lives on waiting only

To be wanted back badly enough? Would you go then,

Even for a few nights, into that other life where you

And that first she loved, blind to the future once, and happy?

 

Would I put on my coat and return to the kitchen where my

Mother and father sit waiting, dinner keeping warm on the stove?

Bowie will never die. Nothing will come for him in his sleep

Or charging through his veins. And he’ll never grow old,

Just like the woman you lost, who will always be dark-haired

 

And flush-faced, running toward an electronic screen

That clocks the minutes, the miles left to go. Just like the life

In which I’m forever a child looking out my window at the night sky

Thinking one day I’ll touch the world with bare hands

Even if it burns.

 

 

          2.

 

He leaves no tracks. Slips past, quick as a cat. That’s Bowie

For you: the Pope of Pop, coy as Christ. Like a play

Within a play, he’s trademarked twice. The hours

 

Plink past like water from a window A/C. We sweat it out,

Teach ourselves to wait. Silently, lazily, collapse happens.

But not for Bowie. He cocks his head, grins that wicked grin.

 

Time never stops, but does it end? And how many lives

Before take-off, before we find ourselves

Beyond ourselves, all glam-glow, all twinkle and gold?

 

The future isn’t what it used to be. Even Bowie thirsts

For something good and cold. Jets blink across the sky

Like migratory souls.

 

 

          3.

 

Bowie is among us. Right here

In New York City. In a baseball cap

And expensive jeans. Ducking into

A deli. Flashing all those teeth

At the doorman on his way back up.

Or he’s hailing a taxi on Lafayette

As the sky clouds over at dusk.

He’s in no rush. Doesn’t feel

The way you’d think he feels.

Doesn’t strut or gloat. Tells jokes.

 

I’ve lived here all these years

And never seen him. Like not knowing

A comet from a shooting star.

But I’ll bet he burns bright,

Dragging a tail of white-hot matter

The way some of us track tissue

Back from the toilet stall. He’s got

The whole world under his foot,

And we are small alongside,

Though there are occasions

 

When a man his size can meet

Your eyes for just a blip of time

And send a thought like SHINE

SHINE SHINE SHINE SHINE

Straight to your mind. Bowie,

I want to believe you. Want to feel

Your will like the wind before rain.

The kind everything simply obeys,

Swept up in that hypnotic dance

As if something with the power to do so

Had looked its way and said:

                                                     Go ahead.
~~~
The grave has more power than the eyes of the beloved.
An open grave with all its magnets.
This weight on the wings. The sky is waiting for an airship.
I have the feeling that I haven’t got much life left.
Three hours after the celestial attack.
Why don’t I respond when I’m being offended?
Because my religion doesn’t allow me to.
Exterior maps: geography. Interior maps: psychography.
And in your hard cathedral I kneel.
Mountains pass camels pass
like the history of wars in antiquity.
Of all the men I am, I can’t find any of them
without the control of the intruding eye.
Problems. Mysteries that fasten themselves to my chest.
All I want is not to see businesses nor gardens
nor markets nor eyeglasses nor elevators.
In order to serve all radio listeners,
without discriminating between social classes, I speak a tongue
that fills hearts with the law of communicating clouds.
I have my brain or whatever it is full of skull moths.
For the world to go on being what it is it must
—per force—take another form.
True poems are fires. When something cherished burns
instead of the fireman I call, rushes forth the incendiary.
It says: live, live, live!
It is Death.
~~~
Oh, oh, you will be sorry for that word!
Give back my book and take my kiss instead.
Was it my enemy or my friend I heard,
“What a big book for such a little head!”
Come, I will show you now my newest hat,
And you may watch me purse my mouth and prink!
Oh, I shall love you still, and all of that.
I never again shall tell you what I think.
I shall be sweet and crafty, soft and sly;
You will not catch me reading any more:
I shall be called a wife to pattern by;
And some day when you knock and push the door,
Some sane day, not too bright and not too stormy,
I shall be gone, and you may whistle for me.
 
~~~
They wore out the ain the letterpress case only aftera few thousand hits under the inked rollers,pulling the crank, turningthe giant wheel.Must have been 1820. Thereabouts.Wanderer, glory-run of letters: thereabouts.Hunger took its due fromthe belly of the a.So? All kept reading itas a — those who could read — and anyway,a bite out of that apple provesour kind mortal. Rare good paperinto page until most everything about the awas shot. Practically prayer, humility,a great foreboding not justbare-bones frugal.Simple aaaa from that a — First letter loved, to hear it ache and filleven at half breath.Look, it’s standard. No one buta divine being or two makes perfect copy.Real case in point: my now and again body sopoorly echoed off my mother, my fatherout of a broken skull simmeringin a bog, BC probably, long before ADpretended anything in order. Earlier, our whole dark hole of a planet copiedunto itself via earthquake, flood, star shard,raging molten ball in the middle, somebig bang’s ideaof a flawed, proper start.For a while there, the tiny awounded. What it does.Doing, to heraldevery human sentence.
~~~
The soldiers are afraid
of the camera. Are you shooting the souk?
The photographer says No no, just her.
I say Just me, just me.
My black dress, a little above the knee, helps.
A girl learns to spectacle enough.
The soldier nods, lowers his head.
The crew remind me to sayNot from here, to say Half-half,
to speak English, mostly.Everyone is always kinder to strangers.
The city will devour its children,
unless she doesn’t recognize them.
And so I, of this city,
I who stand on stages and name this city,
deny this city in the heart of the city,
deny this city at the old gate of the city.
I say Bonjour, I say Thank you, I undo
my accent and put on the colonizer’s tongue.
When you say hometown, what do you mean?
The crew comment on the quality
of the light through the tin roofs,
they say Pretend no one is looking.
But the guy with the espresso and cigarette is looking,
and the teenager who sells batteries is looking,
and the man with the shisha is looking, and the woman
in the clothes shop, his wife perhaps, is looking.
The photographer says Beautiful, says Try
to keep your shoulders even.
~~~
A bride and a groom sitting in an open buggy
in the rain, holding hands but not looking
at each other, waiting for the rain to stop,
waiting for the marriage to begin, embarrassed
by the rain, the effect of the rain on the bridal
veil, the wet horse with his mane in his eyes,
the rain cold as the sea, the sea deep as love,
big drops of rain falling on the leather seat,
the rain beaded on a rose pinned to the groom’s
lapel, the rain on the bride’s bouquet,
on the baby’s breath there, the sound of the rain
hitting the driver’s top hat, the rain
shining like satin on the black street,
on the tips of patent leather shoes, Hokusai’s
father who polished mirrors for a living, Hokusai’s
father watching the sky for clouds, Hokusai’s father’s son
drawing rain over a bridge and over the people crossing
the bridge, Hokusai’s father’s son drawing the rain
for hours, Hokusai’s father rubbing a mirror, the rain
cold as the sea, the sea cold as love, the sea swelling
to a tidal wave, at the tip of the wave white.
~~~
Of all living monuments has the fewestfacts attached to it, they slide right offits surface, no Lincoln lap for them to siton and no horse to be astride. Here is what                                                 I know for sure:Was a gift from one city to another. A citycannot travel to another city, a city cannot visit any city but itself, and in its sadness it gives        away a great door in the air. Well         a city cannot except for Paris, who putson a hat styled with pigeon wings and walksthrough the streets of another city and will noteven see the sights, too full she is of the sightsalready. And within her walk her women,         and the women of Paris looking like         they just walked through an Arch...        Or am I mixing it up I think I am with another famous female statue? Bornin its shadow and shook-foil hot the factsslid off me also. I and the Arch we burnedto the touch. “Don’t touch that Arch a boywe know got third-degree burns from touch-        ing that Arch,” says my mother sittingfor her statue. She is metal on a hilltop andso sad she isn’t a Cross. She was long agogiven to us by Ireland. What an underhand        gift for an elsewhere to give, a door that reminds you you can leave it. She raises        her arm to brush my hair. Oh no femalearmpit lovelier than the armpit of the Arch.
~~~
Through your lens the sequoia swallowed me   
like a dryad. The camera flashed & forgot.
I, on the other hand, must practice my absent-
mindedness, memory being awkward as a touch   
that goes unloved. Lately your eyes have shut
down to a shade more durable than skin’s. I know you   
love distance, how it smooths. You choose an aerial view,   
the city angled to abstraction, while I go for the close   
exposures: poorly-mounted countenances along Broadway,   
the pigweed cracking each hardscrabble backlot.   
It’s a matter of perspective: yours is to love me   
from a block away & mine is to praise the grain-
iness that weaves expressively: your face.
~~~
You’re clean shaven in this country   
where trees grow beards of moss,   
where even bank tellers
look a little like banditos
in vests as pungent as sweatsuits.   
Still, you prefer the vegetable air
to almost any other place on the map.   
After the heart attack,
you considered Paris—
the flying buttresses,
the fractured light of its cathedrals;
the entire city refined and otherworldly,   
ascending on its architectural wings—
but decided you had no use for glory,   
boulevards fur-lined
with statues and expensive trees.
You admit, on the whole,
the towns in this country are ugly.   
One summer you drove toward Nicoya
(a beautiful name that became your destination),   
expecting a fragrant town of mango trees   
but found cattle grazing in the plaza,   
rattling the tin plates
in the ubiquitous Chinese restaurant.
A Coca-Cola sign hung weathered and askew.   
That’s perhaps why you like it,   
it’s a country you can’t count on,   
a country of misfits.
Unable to take root in the mud,
the twentieth century has failed miserably,   
creating neither factory nor industry
but a thirst for soda pop;
like cosmetic surgery,
it is skin deep.
The clock is stuck in the rain   
and the mud of four o’clock.   
There’s nothing to do but wait as if
in a dry cave, a room with a view of the waterfall,   
pinned as you are beneath the downpour.   
The waiter bends over your cup   
without filling it,
the storekeeper holds your change   
until the rain, hypnotic and dramatic,   
leaves the streets and the gutters,
the balcony and the air greener, heavier—
mildew blooming in the closet where your shoes,   
powdered with a sea-green lichen,   
resembles old bronze,
a pair of ancient goblets.
While iguanas lounge in the attic
(a prehistoric version of the domestic rat),
the Office of the Ministry
(a pink and crumbling building   
surrounded by dusty rose trees)   
prints more money to prop   
the flimsy flowered currency.
You can’t predict what your American
dollars will bring by morning.   
In the hotel restaurant
you meet the Undesirable American.   
He learns just enough of the local lingo
to swing by, living on a dwindling account   
and, here and there, a real estate swindle.   
Or the pensionado who buys two cigars,   
offering you one the day
his Social Security arrives.
Like the cockroach, the displaced
have crawled through the cracks
and selected for themselves
an agreeable niche.
A place to start from scratch.
They thrive in the vegetable air.
You wonder how you’ll survive,
unfit, unable to work.
Lacking the predatory skills,
you’ve stayed in the trees,
a dreamer, all your life,
even now wanting to believe
a change of scenery
will get you back on your feet.
A brief hiatus in the vegetable air.
Tonight, you walk along the damp streets,   
an average steak, a glass of wine
swishing in your belly,
to your small room wedged between
a jukebox and a dance hall.
There are so many things you can’t change—
like the dull thrashing music.
You draw the blinds, switch on the tiny cassette.   
Silence. The click of the tape.
And then the familiar aria,
rising like the moon,
lifts you out of yourself,
transporting you to another country   
where, for a moment, you travel light.
~~~
Customs and chemistry made a name for themselves and it was Spot. He's gone to some utopos now, the dirty dog, doctor of  crotches, digger of holes. Your airy clarities be damned,  he loved our must and our mistakes — why hit him, then, who did us good? He's dead, he ought to be at home. He's damned  put out, and so am I.  *       *       * When blue is carried out, the law is red. When noon is said and done, it's dusk again. The greed for table makes the greed for bed.  So cave canem, even stars have litters — little  lookers, cacklers, killers . . . Morning raises up  the hackled men. (What's  milk, among our ilk, but  opportunity for spillers?)  *       *       * He saved our sorry  highfalutin souls — the heavens haven't saved a fly. Orion's  canniness who can condone? — that starring story, strapping blade! —  and Sirius is  just a Fido joke — no laughter shakes the firmament. But O the family dog, the Buddha-dog — son of a bitch! he had a funny bone —
~~~
The subtlest strain a great musician weaves,
Cannot attain in rhythmic harmony
To music in his soul. May it not be
Celestial lyres send hints to him? He grieves
That half the sweetness of the song, he leaves
Unheard in the transition. Thus do we
Yearn to translate the wondrous majesty
Of some rare mood, when the rapt soul receives
A vision exquisite. Yet who can match
The sunset’s iridescent hues? Who sing
The skylark’s ecstasy so seraph-fine?
We struggle vainly, still we fain would catch
Such rifts amid life’s shadows, for they bring
Glimpses ineffable of things divine.
 
~~~
I would consider           re-heating the tweezersif I had the chance,           because, as ducks sayin Ghana, “broccoli            reversal gets priority.”I would consider           re-heating the tweezersif Tu Fu and Cleopatra           had a son named Sel.I have the chance,            because, as ducks ask,“who was generated           in Old Ironsides, AK?”In Ghana, broccoli           reversal gets priorityand grows up to be           a pie dish dismisser.Tu Fu and Cleopatra           had a son named Selwho was generated            in Old Ironsides, AK.He grew up to be           a pie dish dismisser.
~~~
The people who sang to their children in Yiddish and worked in Yiddish
and made love in Yiddish are nearly all gone. Phantasmic. Heym.Der may kumt shoyn on. The month of May has arrived. At the cemetery
my aunt has already draped my grandmother's half of the tombstone
with a white sheet. The fabric is tacked to the polished granite
by gray and brown rocks lifted from my grandfather's side of the plot.
He's been gone over twenty-five years. We are in Beth Israel Cemetery,
Block 50, Woodbridge, New Jersey for the unveiling and the sky is like lead.
We are in my grandmother's shtetl in Poland, but everyone is dead.
The Fraternal Order of Bendin-Sosnowicer Sick & Benevolent Society
has kept these plots faithfully next to their Holocaust memorial—
gray stone archway topped with a menorah and a curse: Pour out Thy wrathupon the Nazis and the wicked Germans for they have destroyed the seed of Jacob.May the almighty avenge their blood. Great is our sorrow, and no consolation is to be found!
My sister, in her cardboard kippah, opens her prayer book—a special edition
she borrowed from rabbinical school—and begins to read in Aramaic.
Not one of us can bring ourselves to add anything to the fixed liturgy.
My son is squatting at the next grave over, collecting decorative stones
from the Glickstein's double plot. We eat yellow sponge cake and drink
small cups of brandy to celebrate my grandmother's life. We are no longer mourners,
says Jewish law. Can we tell this story in Yiddish? Put the words in the right places?
My son cracks a plastic cup until it's shredded to strips, looks like a clear spider,
sounds like an error. When my sister finally pulls back the sheet, all the things
my grandmother was barely fit on the face of the marker. A year ago at the funeral,
her friend Goldie told me she was strong like steel, soft like butter—women like thatthey don't make any more. My mother tries to show my grandmother—now this gray marker—
my son, how he's grown, but he squirms from her arms. Ihr gvure iz nit tzu beshraiben.
Her strength was beyond description. The people who sang to their children in Yiddish
and admonished them in Yiddish are nearly all gone, whole vanished towns that exist now
only in books, their maps drawn entirely by heart: this unknown continent, this language
of nowhere, these stones from a land that never was. Der may kumt shoyn on.
The month of May has arrived. Der vind voyet. The wind howls,
says I'm not a stranger anywhere. On the stones we write all we remember,
but we are poor guardians of memory. Can you say it in Yiddish? Can you bless us?
 
~~~
                              hearing all bells at                               once instructs the final exhale
                              Camelot in thimble of  the gods
                              Marilyn Monroe’s ambulance
lost on the way to the palace of  temperament
a branch of government for the magical arts
                              punch wall of forest for
                              an oaken
                              desk
                              another dream we
                              needed agitating the
               sentence as it rows across a
               newly destroyed heart folding
               following tormenting one another
                              we were all once young and
                              beautiful squandering everything
                              it’s what we came here to do
                              cut off engines to the child
                              registering disposition of the
                              cat in the dark as the
                              size of the darkness
~~~
If you’d seen the Gaillardots’ mullein in the Cedars of the Shouf; if you’d seen the Aleppo dock, red with iron, in Bcharre where the Adonis River’s said to run as red with what was thought his blood; if you’d seen the bearded oat in Burjein, the rayed white horehound in Tripoli; or maybe the milkwort in Ehden, as often I saw the strigose bellflower and the cyclamen, you might have been the more awed by a mallow-leaved bindweed in Aley on your way to the brunnera in Baalbek. The Mediterranean poppy in Nabatieh, Beirut mullein in nearby Baabda, connate Alexanders in Qadisha, fodder vetch in Zgharta,white rocket in Sour, Gypsywort in Marjeyoun, headed Ziziphora in Baakleen, bladder skullcap in Barouk. The viscid catchfly, ah, vying with bats at evening in Zahle—for these the earth of continuous habitation since the Chalcolithic Age salivates at dawn. But not a reed grows where no grave is. In Sacandaga Valley,two thousand bodies were trans-buried by the boneyard gang. They ceded the pitted ground to the dentist gang, whose jackhammers drilled the rock beneath.Powder monkeys tamped the holes with dynamite. The beaver-tooth gang’s axes and cross-cut saws cleared the trees. Bush burners followed. The fires burned for two years. The patience of dam builders built a force equal to the water: It flooded the ashes, the railroad station, and a train, which I saw transposed in the steely swells, or so it seemed. But iron turns a torrent red.
~~~
I caught a bird which made a ball   And they thought better of it. But it is all of which they taught That they were in a hurry yet In a kind of a way they meant it best That they should change in and on account   But they must not stare when they manage   Whatever they are occasionally liable to do It is often easy to pursue them once in a while   And in a way there is no repose They like it as well as they ever did   But it is very often just by the time   That they are able to separate In which case in effect they could Not only be very often present perfectly   In each way whichever they chose.   All of this never matters in authority But this which they need as they are alike   Or in an especial case they will fulfill Not only what they have at their instigation   Made for it as a decision in its entirety   Made that they minded as well as blinded   Lengthened for them welcome in repose   But which they open as a chance But made it be perfectly their allowance   All which they antagonise as once for all   Kindly have it joined as they mind
~~~
I encountered a scaffoldoutside the Holy Trinity Church in Vladimir, Russia.At first I didn’t notice herslumped against the side of the church — she was pretty small for a scaffold, pretty un-assuming. Her safety meshwas torn in places and sun-bleached all overand threatened to dislodgedue to a forceful wind that was typicalof the season. She was shaking.She was fundamentally insecure.She told me that good foundations are essentialand that the men who had put her togetherhadn’t taken advantage of the right opportunities.Now, each day, someone came bycalled her “unsafe” and also “a liability”then left, failing to initiate the dismantling processthat yes would have been painfuland slow, but kinder.International visitors to the churchblamed her for the mess of tools and ragson the grounds and for the factthat they could no longer seethe church’s celebrated muraldepicting Saint Artemy of Verkolaunusually pioushighly veneratedchild saint killed by lightning.His dead body radiated lightnever showed signs of decayand was in fact said to have effectedmultiple miracles of healing.I said comforting things to the scaffoldbut she only seemed to lean more heavilyagainst the side of the church.We are rarely independent structures she saidbefore she dropped a bolt pinwhich released a long section of tubewhich released another bolt pinwhich released several wooden boardsthat scraped another tubeand made an unbearable sound.
~~~
1 Sometime now past in the Autumnal Tide, When Phoebus wanted but one hour to bed, The trees all richly clad, yet void of pride, Were gilded o’re by his rich golden head. Their leaves and fruits seem’d painted but was true Of green, of red, of yellow, mixed hew, Rapt were my senses at this delectable view. 2 I wist not what to wish, yet sure thought I, If so much excellence abide below, How excellent is he that dwells on high? Whose power and beauty by his works we know. Sure he is goodness, wisdom, glory, light, That hath this under world so richly dight. More Heaven than Earth was here, no winter and no night. 3 Then on a stately Oak I cast mine Eye, Whose ruffling top the Clouds seem’d to aspire; How long since thou wast in thine Infancy? Thy strength and stature, more thy years admire, Hath hundred winters past since thou wast born? Or thousand since thou brakest thy shell of horn, If so, all these as nought, Eternity doth scorn. 4 Then higher on the glistering Sun I gaz’d, Whose beams was shaded by the leafy Tree. The more I look’d, the more I grew amaz’d And softly said, what glory’s like to thee? Soul of this world, this Universe’s Eye, No wonder some made thee a Deity: Had I not better known (alas) the same had I. 5 Thou as a Bridegroom from thy Chamber rushes And as a strong man joys to run a race. The morn doth usher thee with smiles and blushes. The Earth reflects her glances in thy face. Birds, insects, Animals with Vegative, Thy heat from death and dullness doth revive: And in the darksome womb of fruitful nature dive. 6 Thy swift Annual and diurnal Course, Thy daily straight and yearly oblique path, Thy pleasing fervour, and thy scorching force, All mortals here the feeling knowledge hath. Thy presence makes it day, thy absence night, Quaternal seasons caused by thy might: Hail Creature, full of sweetness, beauty, and delight. 7 Art thou so full of glory that no Eye Hath strength thy shining Rays once to behold? And is thy splendid Throne erect so high? As, to approach it, can no earthly mould. How full of glory then must thy Creator be? Who gave this bright light luster unto thee: Admir’d, ador’d for ever be that Majesty. 8 Silent alone where none or saw, or heard, In pathless paths I lead my wand’ring feet. My humble Eyes to lofty Skies I rear’d To sing some Song my mazed Muse thought meet. My great Creator I would magnifie, That nature had thus decked liberally: But Ah and Ah again, my imbecility! 9 I heard the merry grasshopper then sing, The black clad Cricket bear a second part. They kept one tune and played on the same string, Seeming to glory in their little Art. Shall creatures abject thus their voices raise? And in their kind resound their maker’s praise: Whilst I, as mute, can warble forth no higher layes. 10 When present times look back to Ages past And men in being fancy those are dead, It makes things gone perpetually to last And calls back months and years that long since fled It makes a man more aged in conceit, Than was Methuselah or’s grand-sire great: While of their persons and their acts his mind doth treat. 11 Sometimes in Eden fair he seems to be, See glorious Adam there made Lord of all, Fancies the Apple, dangle on the Tree, That turn’d his Sovereign to a naked thrall, Who like a miscreant’s driven from that place To get his bread with pain and sweat of face: A penalty impos’d on his backsliding Race. 12 Here sits our Grandame in retired place, And in her lap her bloody Cain new born, The weeping Imp oft looks her in the face, Bewails his unknown hap and fate forlorn; His Mother sighs to think of Paradise, And how she lost her bliss, to be more wise, Believing him that was, and is, Father of lyes. 13 Here Cain and Abel come to sacrifice, Fruits of the Earth and Fatlings each do bring, On Abels gift the fire descends from Skies, But no such sign on false Cain’s offering; With sullen hateful looks he goes his wayes. Hath thousand thoughts to end his brothers dayes, Upon whose blood his future good he hopes to raise. 14 There Abel keeps his sheep, no ill he thinks, His brother comes, then acts his fratricide. The Virgin Earth of blood her first draught drinks, But since that time she often hath been cloy’d; The wretch with ghastly face and dreadful mind, Thinks each he sees will serve him in his kind, Though none on Earth but kindred near then could he find. 15 Who fancies not his looks now at the Barr, His face like death, his heart with horror fraught, Nor Male-factor ever felt like warr, When deep despair with wish of life hath fought, Branded with guilt, and crusht with treble woes, A Vagabond to Land of Nod he goes. A City builds, that wals might him secure from foes. 16 Who thinks not oft upon the Fathers ages. Their long descent, how nephews sons they saw, The starry observations of those Sages, And how their precepts to their sons were law, How Adam sigh’d to see his Progeny, Cloath’d all in his black, sinful Livery, Who neither guilt not yet the punishment could fly. 17 Our Life compare we with their length of dayes Who to the tenth of theirs doth now arrive? And though thus short, we shorten many wayes, Living so little while we are alive; In eating, drinking, sleeping, vain delight So unawares comes on perpetual night, And puts all pleasures vain unto eternal flight. 18 When I behold the heavens as in their prime, And then the earth (though old) still clad in green, The stones and trees, insensible of time, Nor age nor wrinkle on their front are seen; If winter come, and greenness then do fade, A Spring returns, and they more youthfull made; But Man grows old, lies down, remains where once he’s laid. 19 By birth more noble than those creatures all, Yet seems by nature and by custom curs’d, No sooner born, but grief and care makes fall That state obliterate he had at first: Nor youth, nor strength, nor wisdom spring again Nor habitations long their names retain, But in oblivion to the final day remain. 20 Shall I then praise the heavens, the trees, the earth Because their beauty and their strength last longer Shall I wish there, or never to had birth, Because they’re bigger and their bodyes stronger? Nay, they shall darken, perish, fade and dye, And when unmade, so ever shall they lye, But man was made for endless immortality. 21 Under the cooling shadow of a stately Elm Close sate I by a goodly Rivers side, Where gliding streams the Rocks did overwhelm; A lonely place, with pleasures dignifi’d. I once that lov’d the shady woods so well, Now thought the rivers did the trees excel, And if the sun would ever shine, there would I dwell. 22 While on the stealing stream I fixt mine eye, Which to the long’d-for Ocean held its course, I markt, nor crooks, nor rubs that there did lye Could hinder ought but still augment its force: O happy Flood, quoth I, that holds thy race Till thou arrive at thy beloved place, Nor is it rocks or shoals that can obstruct thy pace. 23 Nor is’t enough that thou alone may’st slide, But hundred brooks in thy cleer waves do meet, So hand in hand along with thee they glide To Thetis house, where all imbrace and greet: Thou Emblem true of what I count the best, O could I lead my Rivolets to rest, So may we press to that vast mansion, ever blest. 24 Ye Fish which in this liquid Region ’bide That for each season have your habitation, Now salt, now fresh where you think best to glide To unknown coasts to give a visitation, In Lakes and ponds, you leave your numerous fry, So Nature taught, and yet you know not why, You watry folk that know not your felicity. 25 Look how the wantons frisk to tast the air, Then to the colder bottome streight they dive, Eftsoon to Neptun’s glassy Hall repair To see what trade they, great ones, there do drive, Who forrage o’re the spacious sea-green field, And take the trembling prey before it yield, Whose armour is their scales, their spreading fins their shield. 26 While musing thus with contemplation fed, And thousand fancies buzzing in my brain, The sweet-tongu’d Philomel percht ore my head, And chanted forth a most melodious strain Which rapt me so with wonder and delight, I judg’d my hearing better than my sight, And wisht me wings with her a while to take my flight. 27 O merry Bird (said I) that fears no snares, That neither toyles nor hoards up in thy barn, Feels no sad thoughts, nor cruciating cares To gain more good, or shun what might thee harm Thy clothes ne’re wear, thy meat is every where, Thy bed a bough, thy drink the water cleer, Reminds not what is past, nor whats to come dost fear. 28 The dawning morn with songs thou dost prevent, Sets hundred notes unto thy feathered crew, So each one tunes his pretty instrument, And warbling out the old, begin anew, And thus they pass their youth in summer season, Then follow thee into a better Region, Where winter’s never felt by that sweet airy legion. 29 Man at the best a creature frail and vain, In knowledge ignorant, in strength but weak, Subject to sorrows, losses, sickness, pain, Each storm his state, his mind, his body break, From some of these he never finds cessation, But day or night, within, without, vexation, Troubles from foes, from friends, from dearest, near’st Relation. 30 And yet this sinfull creature, frail and vain, This lump of wretchedness, of sin and sorrow, This weather-beaten vessel wrackt with pain, Joys not in hope of an eternal morrow; Nor all his losses, crosses and vexation, In weight, in frequency and long duration Can make him deeply groan for that divine Translation. 31 The Mariner that on smooth waves doth glide, Sings merrily and steers his Barque with ease, As if he had command of wind and tide, And now becomes great Master of the seas; But suddenly a storm spoils all the sport, And makes him long for a more quiet port, Which ’gainst all adverse winds may serve for fort. 32 So he that faileth in this world of pleasure, Feeding on sweets, that never bit of th’ sowre, That’s full of friends, of honour and of treasure, Fond fool, he takes this earth ev’n for heav’ns bower, But sad affliction comes and makes him see Here’s neither honour, wealth, nor safety; Only above is found all with security. 33 O Time the fatal wrack of mortal things, That draws oblivions curtains over kings, Their sumptuous monuments, men know them not, Their names without a Record are forgot, Their parts, their ports, their pomp’s all laid in th’ dust. Nor wit, nor gold, nor buildings scape times rust; But he whose name is grav’d in the white stone Shall last and shine when all of these are gone. 
~~~
Finding myself in a mesmeric orientation,
before me appeared Benjamin Franklin,
who magnetized his French paramours
at dinner parties as an amusing diversion
from his most serious studies of electricity
and the ethereal fire. I like thinking about
how he would have stood on tiptoe to kiss
their buzzing lips and everyone would gasp
and clap for the blue spark between them.
I believe in an honest and forthright manner,
a democracy of plain speech, so I have to
find a way to explain I don’t care to have sex
anymore. Once I was a high school teacher
and there was a boy who everyday came in late,
who only came to school at all to sell drugs
out of his backpack, upon which he laid
his head like a pillow and closed his eyes
while I pointed at a chart diagramming
the anatomy of a sparrow. The vice principal
was watching and taking notes as I taught
this class, so I slid the bag from under
his cheek, as if not to wake him, wrapped
his fingers around a pen. I was trying
to be a gentle mother and also trying
to show I was in control of an unstable
situation. The boy, also trying to be
in control of himself, walked so slow
to my desk and we stood to watch him
push everything—binders, piles of ungraded
papers, a beaker of red pens to the floor.
He was so calm. How do you like it when I touch your things. I do not like it. I live
in a house with many blue mason jars,
each containing a feather collection or starfish
collection or vertebrae collection, and also
there is a fully articulated fetal alligator skeleton.
Each window is pressed by the design
of a sweet-gum branch, all the little orange
and red stars of its leaves, you can’t see
the perfect geometry this close, just haphazard
parabolas, but beneath the foundation
the roots mirror the branching. I have
a chart of this to pull down. The view is flat
and so quiet on the inside. Have I been
forthright yet? What I want to know is
what happens if I decide to never have sex
again? Or more precisely, can I decide
to not have sex again and still be kind?
And be a joy to others? I should mention
I am a wife. I should mention I was told
my sole purpose is to be joy to others.
The sidewalks outside are very full of people
and when I look at them I feel hopeless.
Benjamin Franklin was so jolly with his kite
and his key and his scandalous electricity.
He was so in love with women and drink
and democracy. Before I was this way,
I was not a house, I was just a jar and what
I wanted was to be broken. A cool trick
you can do that I once showed a class is crank
a wheel covered in felt against another felt
wheel. Static bristles and sparks and makes
your hair stand on end. But hook it to
a Leyden jar and the electricity fills up
in there, invisible as air. Becomes a glass
battery, until you too much the thing, then
wow! broken glass everywhere. I remember
wanting that. Do I have to always want that?
My house is blue and quiet. I can hardly
hear the squirrel in my sweet-gum tree
dancing like a sunbeam to sing his riddles:
“A house full, a hole full, but you cannot
gather a bowl full.” The air of everywhere
is wet with electric fluid, you can’t even tell,
but pop, whiz, everywhere. “In this
field,” Ben says, “the soul has room
enough to expand, to display all of her
extravagances.” The sweet gum has 10,000
sticky, spiky seed balls. They start green
but grow black and fall for want of
a barren season. They look like sea urchins.
I call them tree urchins and think it’s
a funny joke. I don’t tell it to anyone,
as I am tired of being told what is not.
Such a secret, I know, is an extravagance,
and I like best how it’s an extravagance so
small you must keep it in a jar with others
of its kind for it to ever mean anything at all.
~~~
title after Robert Clermont Witt, 1906



Refuse to make eye contact with the subject.
He has been following you around the gallery.
You are certain that he can see down your shirt.
Look at other subjects, but know that they, too,
are not of primary interest. Even when they watch
you. Try not to consider what happened
to the small girl staring furiously, the thin-faced
woman wanly looking away. Do not think about
what they had for breakfast, if the bread was hard.
Certainly do not consider the odors underneath
their arms and skirts. Do not allow a breeze into
the room they sit in. Do not assume I am talking
about any painting: step away from the subject.
All subject. Was the painter in love? Do not ask
the question. Imagine you are the painter,
blocking out everything you don’t want to see.
Everything is out of the picture. Stop looking.
Stop seeking what isn’t there. Tuck your narratives
back in your pocket. Look for perspective, light,
shade. Let your eyes wander back to the girl.
She is trying to say something but her mouth
has been painted deliberately shut. Her lips, thin.
~~~
We were told that the cloud cover was a blanket
about to settle into the shape of the present
which, if we wanted to imagine it
as a person, would undoubtedly look startled—
as after a verbal berating
or in advance of a light pistol-whipping.
The camera came and went, came and went,
like a masked man trying to light a too-damp fuse.
The crew was acting like a litter of mimics
trying to make a killing.
Anything to fill the vacuum of time.
The wind whirred and tracked the clouds.
The credits, we were told, would take the form
of a semi-scrawl, urban-sprawl, graffiti-style
typography. The soundtrack would include
instrumental versions of "Try a Little Tenderness."
Our handler, who was walking backward
in order to maintain constant eye contact with us,
nearly stumbled over a girl in a sheath and pearls
who was misting a shelf of hothouse flowers.
While the two apologized to each other,
we stood and watched the fine spray settle
over the leaves and drip onto the floor.
On the way out, we passed a door
with a small window reinforced with wired glass
through which we could see a nurse
positioning a patient on a table. We swore
afterward we'd heard her say, "Lie perfectly still
and look only inward." A clock chimed and
as the others were audibly counting backwards
from five to zero, I thought I heard someone say,
"Now let go of this morbid attachment to things."
 
~~~
sound opens sound
shank of globe             strings floating out
                something like images are here
                opening up avenues to view a dome
       a distant clang reaches the edifice.
                              
                understanding what it means
                to understand music
~~~
 I burned my life, that I might find
A passion wholly of the mind,
Thought divorced from eye and bone,
Ecstasy come to breath alone.
I broke my life, to seek relief
From the flawed light of love and grief.
 
With mounting beat the utter fire
Charred existence and desire.
It died low, ceased its sudden thresh.
I had found unmysterious flesh—
Not the mind’s avid substance—still
Passionate beyond the will.
 
 
~~~
Among other things,thanks for explaining how the generous death of old trees forms the red powdered floor of the forest.
~~~
And move and hold back
entering by the highroad through the words
and fall like a person hit by sleep
arriving at the place without light
 
And fall like a dead body falls
and find there the great enemy
and come to a tower all of stones
such that through it the earth opens
 
We pass between the martyrs and the high walls
even up there water is pouring out
then turning and fording again
sling the noose from the roof of the house
 
And each and every vapor spent
over winning and not losing
in which it stands caught out
fleet then catapults like a stone
 
Filling our view
whereupon another valley is revealed
~~~
I lived in the first century of world wars.
Most mornings I would be more or less insane,
The newspapers would arrive with their careless stories,
The news would pour out of various devices
Interrupted by attempts to sell products to the unseen.
I would call my friends on other devices;
They would be more or less mad for similar reasons.
Slowly I would get to pen and paper,
Make my poems for others unseen and unborn.
In the day I would be reminded of those men and women,
Brave, setting up signals across vast distances,
Considering a nameless way of living, of almost unimagined values.
As the lights darkened, as the lights of night brightened,
We would try to imagine them, try to find each other,
To construct peace, to make love, to reconcile
Waking with sleeping, ourselves with each other,
Ourselves with ourselves. We would try by any means
To reach the limits of ourselves, to reach beyond ourselves,
To let go the means, to wake.
I lived in the first century of these wars.
~~~
Their eggs are laid on lupine. Tiny jade
hairstreaks I could easily mistake for dew.
Too precious. Too incidental,
and besides that, blue, these trills that flounce
in my potato patch, drawn
from dryland origins to the domestic
stain of water from my hose.
What an old woman would study, I think
as you hand me the guidebook, distracted
by the replica of a parasol
growing out of a bleached cow pie.
The Siamese kitten with his butterfly eyes
comes running, his mouth full
of swallowtail, his breath smelling of borax
and sugar I have poured
over the ant hills in the garden.
He is young and intent on eating poison.
We bushwhack through Paradise,
what is there to say except to lament
the daily evidence of its passing.
How the common blues scatter from my shade.
And you, so fragile, so sick, so thin,
your diet restricted, keep pointing out
the bearded face of larkspur.
When the angels fell, a fifteenth-centruy bishop says,
there were 133, 306, 668 of them.
It takes us all afternoon to cross the field.
The body, it is so sad what happens to it.
If you fell, you would dry up instantly.
But these are not angel wings
who disguise themselves as leaf or shred of bark,
who are named after the stops
in meaning our language must make room for:
the comma whose wings look battered,
or the violet underside of the question mark.
To keep the mind from clenching, you say,
is the main thing. Even the most
beautiful days always seem to have death in them.
As Valentinus said; our fall into love and sleep.
You especially like the dark alpines
with their furred bodies and lack of marking.
And the sulphurs, yellowed scraps that fall
from a myth of origin that doesn’t include us.
When we find them, we will wonder
who is still alive. We speak of our souls with such
surface ease. But who will take such care for us?
You bend and bend to the scrappy blue sea,
your back turned to the moon fluttering above you.
I have been thinking so much of strength
this week, yours and mine, I mean,
the field of attention that can be strengthened.
~~~
1. OVERTURE
                           
                   ”Obviously there is much to be said for the
                   conscious cultivation and extension of taste, but
                   there is also something to be said for the
                   functional reaction to artistic design (and
                   honeysuckles) as normal elements of human
                   existence.”
                                                      —Albert Murray 
~~~
Two hundred seventy
Ghost Dancers died dreaming
That humanity would drown
In a flood of White sins.
Then the renewed earth
Would reclaim city and town,
Leaving only Ghost Dancers
And those who lived by nature’s laws.
History books say the threat is gone.
The Ghost Dance died with the ancestors—
Wovoka and his sacred dream
Were destroyed.
Each time it rains,
I go out to the sidewalk,
Where the tree roots
Have broken the concrete
Listening to the water’s whispering:
“It is coming soon.”
~~~
It was too big to take on the subway
so she came to it every day
that winter in the room
where it waited on one foot,
sly seabird.
 
She sat down and opened her hands,
parted the wings one by one
till it flew ahead of her fingers
singing
the lame foot skidding on gold.
 
The sun turned its back on the glass
and paled as she sat
obstinate
green-eyed
her foot on its foot
pumping.
 
The fire died.
Snow hissing at the window.
Above her head a baroque hailstorm
failed in 4/4 time. She sang,
unable to hold the bright hinge
to her heart.
Lame savior she sang.
It bowed as she left
and sat, chastened by scales,
wondering.
 
~~~
Part of suffering is the useless urge to announce that you’re suffering.
 
There is no other way to say it: I’m suffering. Just to say “I suffer”
helps.
 
I read somewhere, “we become lyrical when we suffer.”
 
Happiness is suffering for the right reasons.
 
First-order suffering is second-order happiness.
 
You have to suffer for beauty? Because you have to suffer.
 
We pride ourselves on a high quality of suffering.
 
Turgenev was born in 1818 in the Province of Orel, and suffered
during his childhood from a tyrannical mother.
 
In the past their suffering was less absurd.
 
The problem is, everything’s worse. Like, paper or plastic? We’re all
still going to die suffering.
 
I value being alone with my thoughts, but it’s weird to say, “This
thing that makes us suffer less, we have to stop doing it.”
 
Isn’t it kind of the point of culture to assuage our feeling needless
and alone?
 
How does one suffer “gladly,” exactly?
 
At least the rich get to suffer in comfort.
 
It makes the life feel longer. Live to suffer another day.
 
One’s past suffering can be a great source of comfort. A torturous
luxury. Velvet upholstery.
 
Suffering is happiness, after forty minutes of desolate shuffling. The
point is, life is suffering.
 
About suffering, no one is ever wrong.
 
~~~
Two women on a trainsit beside me.I am young and the worldis flying and I am watching.One of them is frosty.The other turns like a leafto hand me something —it looked for all the world like a page.I thought at the timethat it needed me and I was right.The letters fell into placeand simple flowers grew.Now it talks unceasinglyin long white versesas if at a wedding,something women understandand gently want and then regift.I myself agree with Herbert,who in a dark mood conjuredthe mushrooms underfootunseen by bride or groomand with him I say, Perhapsthe world is unimportantafter all, though this is notwhat one discusses withwomen on a train, no matterhow long the journey,or untroubled the land.
~~~
The Poet:          Fugitive lung, prodigal intestine—            where’s the pink crimp in my side            where they took you out? The Octopus:          It must be a dull world, indeed,            where everything appears            to be a version or extrapolation            of you.            The birds are you.            The springtime is you.            Snails, hurricanes, saddles, elevators—            everything becomes            you.            I, with a shift            of my skin, divest my self            to become the rock            that shadows it.            Think of when            your reading eyes momentarily drift,            and in that instant            you see the maddening swarm of alien ciphers submerged within the text            gone before you can focus.            That’s me.                      Or your dozing revelation            on the subway that you are            slowly being            digested. Me again.            I am the fever dream            in which you see your loved ones            as executioners. I am also their axe.            Friend, while you’re exhausting            the end of a day            with your sad approximations,            I’m a mile deep            in the earth, vamping            my most flawless impression            of the abyss            to the wild applause of eels.
~~~
The wrong words sit beside us
Where the flesh is heavy.
The right words come most easily
To those who sleep.
I put my boots in a CVS bag
Because the weather demanded it
And my jacket over
The windshield in the morning
To confuse the sun.
Of mine own life, I'll tell you
One thing the internet
Won't tell you—I wear my hair
Like a woman sometimes.
The project of the snow's
To put the sky in lo-fi
And the memory of last week's
Snow's a gash in the air.
The mountains and seas
Have a queer look about them.
A hoax of golden daffodils
Obscures them, you might say.
I've been told
We should pretend
That everything we see is real,
That images should try
As best they can
To come to life. I feel that iron
Should take the place of snow
In the literature
And that silk flowers
Should be manufactured like
Real ones each spring.
I'm reading the letters
Of distinguished men to you.
A broadside of a bad poem
On very good paper.
A treatise on how to infuse
Brandy with plums. My fat ass
Surveys the greensward
And when I step
In the manner befitting a person
Of little station in the world
The dandelions seem to
Vanish in retrospect
As though to die were just
To overlook the rituals
That accompany
The death and life of weeds
And to fold oneself
Back into one's roots.
I am so big
I mean my ass is so big
I can't fit in this room I'm building.
My ass can barely fit
Without assistance
Through the door of this stanza
Which is why I invented
The pronoun "you." The streetlamps
Seemed to you to want to
Break apart the clouds
So we left the city, are always
In the process
Of abandoning a city
Somewhere. Some days now
You'll find us trolling
The hillsides for wildflowers.
Other times, sitting at the very center
Of our garden, googling "beauty"
With the filter off.
~~~
Yes, I live inside the piano,but there is no need for youto come and visit me.
~~~
Dear Letters, Fond Letters,        Must I with you part? You are such a source of joy    To my lonely heart. Sweet Letters, Dear Letters,        What a tell you tell; O, no power on earth can break    This strange mystic spell! Dear Letters, Fond Letters,        You my secret know—Don’t you tell it, any one—     Let it live and grow.
~~~
—After Catullus



My house disgusted me, so I slept in a tent.
My tent disgusted me, so I slept in the grass. The grass disgusted me,
so I slept in my body, which I strung like a hammock from two ropes.
My body disgusted me, so I carved myself out of it.
 
My use of knives disgusted me because it was an act of violence.
My weakness disgusted me because “Hannah” means “hammer.”
The meaning of my name disgusted me because I’d rather be known
as beautiful. My vanity disgusted me because I am a scholar.
 
My scholarship disgusted me because knowledge is empty.
My emptiness disgusted me because I wanted to be whole.
My wholeness would have disgusted me because to be whole
is to be smug. Still, I tried to understand wholeness
 
as the inclusiveness of all activities: I walked out into the yard,
trying to vomit and drink milk simultaneously. I tried to sleep
while smoking a cigar. I have enough regrets to crack all the plumbing.
I’m whole only in that I’ve built my person from every thought I’ve ever loved.
~~~
1.
Someone plays
                     & the breaking mounts.
Raw material for worthy forthcoming;
indecipherable, discrete.
                                       Plays
rhapsodies as the air cools
and vanquishes: nothing sits still, yet.
The land is a result of its use, I explained.
Everything else rested while the kids made a girdle
removed from classical syntax. Shed, and
something breaks, mounting
the small hill to its vista: I saw
a rope of trees in another country.
I could not say I am lost in the proper way.
The season is huge.
This house is haunted: I planted it.
Where? In the shed, and
spoiled by attention. You see?
Every bit counts, when the morning displays
the serious ratio of the given stars.
What made us tear the hours into lines?
So things became a burden to shed, and
astute as a hungry pilgrim
but not brave, not expert.
It is impolite to stare. Is unwise
to plunder the easily forgotten,
easily shed, and2.
They drummed and drummed, attached to a vestigial
clamor. The heat splayed; sparklers
ravished the fog.
Morning tore the dead back to shore;
enemy ships floundered and were forgotten.
Still, nothing was appeased:
the living silhouette drifted into view
like an ephemeral sail promoting ease
between wreckages.
                              Not speaking a word of English
she animated the landscape
with abundance, a chosen self
lively translated into the color of her eyes.
Awkward and luminous, a stilted charm
separating figure from ground, and solving it.
What pushed up toward the abysmal
with such new appraisals, such sure interest?
The mute girl had seen glories
but what had she come to know?
A finite figure in a rainy field.
A naked figure in a pool.
A skipping figure across a bridge.
A lost figure on a city street.
A moaning figure on a huge bed.
A smiling face in a photograph.
All summer, I circled the garden for her sake.
 
In memory of my sister Jennifer
~~~
Oblong, its jutted ends rounding into circles,The old sunken basin lies with its flat, marble lipAn inch below the terrace tiles.Over the stagnant waterSlide reflections:The blue-green of coned yews;The purple and red of trailing fuchsiasDripping out of marble urns;Bright squares of skyRibbed by the wake of a swimming beetle.Through the blue-bronze waterWavers the pale uncertainty of a shadow.An arm flashes through the reflections,A breast is outlined with leaves.Outstretched in the quiet waterThe statue of a Goddess slumbers. But when Autumn comesThe beech leaves cover her with a golden counter-pane.
~~~
A youth for Jane with ardour sighed,
 The maid with sparkling eye;But to his vows she still replied,
 ‘I’ll hear you by and by.’‘Suspense (he cries) my bloom decays,
 And bids my spirits fly;Now hear my vows,’ — but still she says,
 ‘I’ll hear you by and by.’At length her frowns his love subdue,
 He shuns her scornful eye,And Emma seeks, who’ll hear him woo
 Both now, and by and by.And soon to church he leads the maid,
 When lo! he sees draw nigh,The now repentant fair who said
 She’d hear him by and by.‘Hear me (she cries): no more in vain
 Thy hear for me shall sigh!’ —
 ‘I’m busy now (said he) — but, Jane!
 I’ll hear you by and by.’
~~~
I. Deer Season
 
The quiet of windows pours its sand in my ear.What, what? ask the dolls of evening
 
though they do not wish to hear my answer.
Five hens are alive in the brush, purring
 
toward the slough. No one here has a rifle
but the wind turns abruptly and returns a report.
 
Three bright orange vests hang at the ready.
The doe turns in her frame above the stove,
 
and her season climbs like the moon into its place
in the sky’s clock. The green theater
 
with its elegant aspens goes more threadbare
each week, so I’ll soon see the others, heretofore
 
only heard. Just to the south the casino lights
ride the underbellies of clouds, and further
 
down the interstate more world twirls
in its paper and drinks, while the baby throws
 
his feet through the bars, and the father
takes him like a little canoe on the billowy
 
lake of his chest. Comes a mewling, then,
from my dark, a mooing, a whine, feathered
 
or furred I can’t divine. The girl with the flat face
and bleached lips read her poems in crisp
 
Ivy League whatnot, but I got sidetracked
by the way her torso seemed stacked, pressed
 
in layers like shale, so there was a weight to her
that hung in the bottom of the eye like the bulk
 
of a tear that never quite falls. It’s true
the intelligence was clear as green ice, and just
 
as hard, stripped of its I and heat. Her baby
burbled on in the back of the room happily not
 
in the poems. Oh little rabbit of grief on the spot
where the last dog was turned under, don’t speak.
 
I make a fire, then dream a fire: wind carries
its gray rags into the woods, and the crackling
 
in the grate enters my ducts, wakes me.
When I look out, the grass along the fence
 
is crawling with light, and the last wild asters
press their blue buttons into the cold glass.
 
 
II. The New Year
 
Zero and a fine hard snow burns
when it hits bare skin. A white
 
ridge glows inside the birches
across the slough where snow articulates
 
the distance. Where water moves,
where the land heaves. I haul oak chunks
 
in a plastic sled. When I bend to stack
the splits, my breasts pop and burn,
 
and my child’s face rises like a bird
razoring its shadow over the snow.
 
Wind takes the rag of some old self
and shakes it at me. The heart is only
 
another shape the view stretches to include.
Birches march out of the hardwoods
 
with their white waists radiant, so many
clones on one taproot. A jay circles
 
the full feeders fending off smaller birds.
I make this vocal gesture because self
 
is simply one edge of me. Out here
there’s only an economy of wood burned
 
or to be burned, how much water’s left
in the tank, how hard or soft the light.
 
Degrees and drafts. This room and everything in it
are mine, and though I try to be selfish and grim,
 
my child has made me enduringly plural,
more than I, but not quite we.
 
Black-capped chickadees flee
from three big jays at the feeder. Shrieking
 
and diving in the strong winter light, the jays
are not actually blue. Their feathers refract light
 
so they appear blue. Self-luminous,
hardy and belligerent as pronouns.
 
 
III. Easter
 
The kick of the screw finding purchase in pine
slams my wrist bone, elbow and shoulder,
but it’s in, and the panel is up. Now another
and another until the wall is flush. I mark
 
and cut each length with the small tooth
of the new jigsaw my husband thought
I should have. Two days apart from him
and the child, I’ve forgotten the pump
 
to empty my breasts, so the saw’s jump
at the end of the cut draws the burning
up. And with it a guilt as bright as the room
where I drive plank after plank against the studs,
 
each a satisfaction against the body’s wish
to be elsewhere. Even into the night, I can’t put
down my drill. I stoke the fire and drive
more screws, loving the growl when they’re
 
in as far as they’ll go. The mind arranging
which planks and trim tomorrow, next week
and spring. Even my sleep is a cutting and fastening
broken by my turning on the full globes
 
of my breasts. So toward morning I dream
of parties given by women I used to know,
and to which I’m not and will never be invited,
trays of fancy sandwiches and petit fours,
 
half moon glasses of seething champagne.
~~~
Last night in bedI mouthed a prayerof my own composition.It sounded offhand, it was carelesslyaddressed, it twisted my meaningentirely, it left an ache,I didn’t know what I was doing.So I took down my yellowed copyof French With Picturesby the late literary critic I.A. Richardsand I put my petitioninto soft French words.I.A. Richards believed that ironywas the language of redemption.He wrote and lectured famously on this,but his masterpiece was French With Pictures.“The chapeau is on the table.”“The man with the beard stands before the window.”“She comes from a village by the sea.”There is no improving the old traditions.They are already mortal, partial, and wrong.The woman at the table by the windowputs her head into her hands.“Into your hands,” she said.
~~~
paint over thedead end sign
           are police writers?
           yes they are writing into
                                 books our
                         little cherub of
                  misunderstanding
             a thinking to push us
              back into body of the
                                          wholelove yourself more next time
                     their reports read
stones sink as they please everything expands at the very end a lit cigarette into our dark hello
~~~
At first all you see are the folds
of drapery, high grass close together, swaying
beads you parted as a child, field behind
the house, then river. Sky.
You were told finches lived there, red-
winged, tipsy, upside down their hold
on the reeds, even so
they sang, trilling over and over
your outstretched hands song
poured like seeds from a basket or from
a bowl, water.
                   There was a woman,
young, beautiful—you used to hug her
from behind, closing your hands
over the cry of surprise
she gave out
like perfume. Now here
she is, rising
from the dead
landscape of memory, just this
fragment of her, still   
kneeling.
~~~
don’t expect too much.
 
Well I expect you to go into the
fucking human tunnel
I’m going.
 
pink grimy glossed
entabulature, welted
and tattooed. Enfolded in
ropy ceiling-hangings
but it isn’t a room,
 
and bumblingly sliding
out, little legs of
 
a little girl, bum on the wall/opening
 
pink legs sticking out like a
hermit crab’s, she’s coming!
 
shudder out the little-girl
legs with a little
girl head mostly eyes, no ears,
bug brain, aimless
 
Send her to school
 
It’s cold, and where should she
go, she will eat her
legs with her mandibles
 
her eyes will retract inside.
 
Stroke her riding hood
Settle down, little
 
nobody will hurtcha
 
by breaking off your little legs,
six little legs,
if you come.
~~~
Herodotus says the king made a bowl to leave behind
the memory of a number. We don’t know the number.
We don’t know if it was divisible by two or three.
I want, at the moment, the number to indicate
a ratio, part of a proportion, because the measurement
of the earth depends on this, the balance among things,
the snow at the bottom of the hill, the gold garage light
caged in a tree, my love for my friend and the distance
between us, which I can’t bear.
I made a pinhole camera to demonstrate proportion,
and everything bright hovers on its milky eye,
and here is the catalogue of what hovers there
smaller than itself: the blue horizon and the dash
at the stoplight, a shell night-light, the gazing ball
of the sun going down against the white back fence,
which made it look like night in the woods lit
from underneath on the wax. I held these things
yesterday, along with two pearls that are spheres
hanging from my living room ceiling.
My friend is smaller now, and if I held my camera up
to her, she would give off enough light to hover
pocket-sized in my hand, and grand in the world.
~~~
You swear the twin spirits
taught you to write.
At night, you climbed
the leaves to hear the gods.
Catch in the throat. Hollow breath.       Paj is not pam is not pab.
    Blossom is not blanket is not help.           Ntug is not ntuj is not ntub.
        Edge is not sky is not wet.
On sheet of bamboo
with indigo branch.
      To txiav is not the txias.
           To scissor is not the cold.
The obsidian mask
will make its own sleep,
leave behind the silver
your body won’t shed.
Now you are Niam Ntawv
who was once a young farmer
scrawling in secret toward
the triggering day.
When they could take no more,
when all that you had was given,
you lined your grave with paper.
~~~
The man who murders his wife
Is not the same as the man
Who goes around and murders a stranger.
 
I am a woman but I am not
The same as another woman.
Identity politics are bullshit.
 
There is only the smart and the evil,
The good and the righteous.
There is only one color on the earth.
 
In its infinite degradations it becomes music and mathematics.
There is shit on my hands
When I have been playing around with specifics.
 
Love your lover. You are a lover.
With each breath God has put a golden faith
Upon the snowy mountains of the world.
 
Here, look at the snowy mountains,
Glittering with snow.
They are wiser than you might think.
 
And in your soul, the small grey animals
Of the world sit and wait to do good
For you, and together
 
We are one thing, bleating a
Somber, scurrying lullaby to
Lapsing pinkish angels.
 
Upon a mountain
The angels smile sleepily as they stretch
Their very long legs, thinking of us.
 
And wise they might seem, us and the angels,
But really it is only God who is wise.
~~~
To map the consequences of regardless, of underestimate,
   Of feverish faith, of the mechanical modernism of your false terrain. As if
Port Sulphur remained nominal, its slick globules merely figurative
      Between territories of wait and wetlands of trust.
 
To etch the shallow-water horizon— a techno-utopian tribute
         To shrimp estuaries, bird rookeries, oyster bays,
To tube worms & sea turtles. To watercolor these pelican grasses,
            Oxidized, unapologetic executive marshes, roseated spoonbills.
 
For you who longed to smear concentric circles,
            To have trusted you with longitude and latitude,
To blur this sargassum border between mourning,
               Fighting, and willful denying of objects and subjects. As if
 
Generations of fishermen, scaling orders of magnitude,
                  Navigated oily streaks of miles in a legend of inches,
Skeletal, ghostly swarms of now-opaque, milky jellyfish. As if
                     to bury the blowout, rescind the rig. To fortify, to intone.
 
If naming were not violence, to witness an active verb:                     Top kill, junk shot, top hat, dance dance revolution.
These wayward scripts a frontier province palimpsest.
                        Offshore yet another beacon, another account. Explosive violet iridescent.
 
~~~
For Joseph Flum



When he got to the farmhouse, he rifled through
the cabinets, drawers, and cupboards,
and his buddies did too. The place was abandoned,
or so he thought, and his buddies did too.
He tried to talk to people in town, and his buddies did too,
but he was the only one whose Yiddish made it
across into German. They took his meaning.
He, in the farmhouse, took a camera and a gun,
but his buddies, who knows. About the gun,
it’s also hard to say, but after the war he took up
photography, why not, and shot beautiful women
for years. Got pretty good at it, and how.
Won prizes and engraved plates, put them in a drawer, forgot
the war, forgot his buddies, forgot the women, forgot the drawer.
~~~
The change of color is likely and a difference a very little difference is prepared. Sugar is not a vegetable.   Callous is something that hardening leaves behind what will be soft if there is a genuine interest in there being present as many girls as men. Does this change. It shows that dirt is clean when there is a volume.   A cushion has that cover. Supposing you do not like to change, supposing it is very clean that there is no change in appearance, supposing that there is regularity and a costume is that any the worse than an oyster and an exchange. Come to season that is there any extreme use in feather and cotton. Is there not much more joy in a table and more chairs and very likely roundness and a place to put them.   A circle of fine card board and a chance to see a tassel.   What is the use of a violent kind of delightfulness if there is no pleasure in not getting tired of it. The question does not come before there is a quotation. In any kind of place there is a top to covering and it is a pleasure at any rate there is some venturing in refusing to believe nonsense. It shows what use there is in a whole piece if one uses it and it is extreme and very likely the little things could be dearer but in any case there is a bargain and if there is the best thing to do is to take it away and wear it and then be reckless be reckless and resolved on returning gratitude.   Light blue and the same red with purple makes a change. It shows that there is no mistake. Any pink shows that and very likely it is reasonable. Very likely there should not be a finer fancy present. Some increase means a calamity and this is the best preparation for three and more being together. A little calm is so ordinary and in any case there is sweetness and some of that.   A seal and matches and a swan and ivy and a suit.   A closet, a closet does not connect under the bed. The band if it is white and black, the band has a green string. A sight a whole sight and a little groan grinding makes a trimming such a sweet singing trimming and a red thing not a round thing but a white thing, a red thing and a white thing.   The disgrace is not in carelessness nor even in sewing it comes out out of the way.   What is the sash like. The sash is not like anything mustard it is not like a same thing that has stripes, it is not even more hurt than that, it has a little top. 
~~~
They lie under stars in a field. They lie under rain in a field. Under sun.  Some people are like this as well— like a painting hidden beneath another painting.  An unexpected weight the sign of their ripeness.
~~~
I plan to be the world authority on peafowl. Believe I'll be offered a chair someday at the chicken college. —Flannery O'Connor



Certainly are niceto want to give me that dog.I raise peacocks—you can't keep dogsand them on the same place.People come herehave to leave the dog in the car else the peachickens take to the treeswith nervous prostrations.I have twenty-seven. Placesounds like a jungleat night. They yelland scream at the leastatmospheric disturbanceor mechanical noise.Sitting on the back steps, I spenddays studying howthey could decoratethe lawn to advantage. They preferto sit on the tractors,the top of the chickenhouse or garbage can lid. I adjustto their taste, whichis anti-dog. Thanksbut I'll take the thought forthe dog. Appreciateyou wanting to give it.Come visit. Nothing to do herebut sit, walk,collect red bug bites,show you a peacock beforehis tail gets ratty.
~~~
I thought I had lost myself,
but I see it’s you that’s gone missing.
O always elsewhere.
What yacht or spaceship have you hijacked?
In what seedy hideaway do you scoff
at the sameness of all cities, all ideas?
Once you made me loquacious
because what’s the point in saying anything
if there isn’t the possibility of being misunderstood.
Now I am nearly speechless with boredom.
I will wait Madame Butterfly-style for your return.
~~~
I language want to dress my fancies in, The hair's uncurled, the garment's loose and thin.Had they but silver lace to make them gay,They'd be more courted than in poor array; Or, had they art, would make a better show;But they are plain; yet cleanly do they go.The world in bravery doth take delight,And glistering shows do more attract the sight: And every one doth honor a rich hood,As if the outside made the inside good.And every one doth bow and give the place, Not for the man's sake but the silver lace.Let me intreat in my poor book's behalf,That all will not adore the golden calf.Consider, pray, gold hath no life therein,And life, in nature, is the richest thing.Be just, let Fancy have the upper place,And then my verses may perchance find grace.
~~~
I  Today I dissected a squid, the late acacia tossing its pollen across the black of the lab bench. In a few months the maples  will be bleeding. That was the thing:  there was no blood only textures of gills creased like satin,  suction cups as planets in rows. Be careful not to cut your finger
~~~
?) Let every sentence begin: I have been grossly mistaken.The stars are gone. Kirk: Kindly tell me what happened to the stars.
Kierkegaard shuttles past Reason to planet Absurd, a gas giant
without a detectable landing pad. He says, it’s the leap that matters.We’re being pulled toward the center of the zone of darkness.
Kenosis required, emptying the self of self. His sky lit, mine blazes
black, an experimental physics. Doubt the gravity that repels, attracts.
Dark energy : Dark matter : Attempt to probe : Universe [Static].
Neil deGrasse Tyson: we are a speck on a speck on a speck
on a speck.
~~~
I love him so, this creature I do pray was treated kindly. I will pay as much as pig-lovers see fit to guarantee him that. As for his fat,  I’d give up years yes years of my  own life for such a gulpable semblable.  (My life! Such as it is! This liberality of leaves! The world won’t need those seventeen more poems, after all, there being so few subjects to be treated. Three if by subject we mean anyone submitted to another’s will. Two if by subject we mean  topic. One if by death we wind up meaning love. And none if a subject  must entail the curlicue’s indulgence of itself.)
~~~
Sonnet 19 (On His Blindness) by John Milton



1. spent

In Sonnet 19, Milton makes the seemingly deliberate choice to avoid “the” and “a” — respectively, the most common and the sixth most common words in English usage. Instead of these articles —  definite and indefinite — the poem stages a territorial dispute between  possessives: the octave is “my” land, the sestet is “his” land, with the occasional “this” or “that” flagging no man’s land. We come to understand Milton’s mistake — the professed regret of the poem — as this act of claiming. It is only through his taking possession that the universal light is divided up, apportioned into “my light” — a finite commodity that by being subjected to ownership becomes capable of being “spent.”
“Spent” — a word like a flapping sack.My mistake was similar. I came to consider my body — its tug-of-war of tautnesses and slacknesses — to be entirely my own, an appliance for generating various textures and temperatures of friction. Should I have known, then, that by this act of self-claiming, I was cutting  myself off from the eternal, the infinite, that I had fashioned myself into a resource that was bounded and, therefore, exhaustible?
2. wide
The “wide” is always haunted by surprise. In a dark world, the “wide” is the sudden door that opens on unfurling blackness, the void pooling at the bottom of the unlit stairs. To be bounded is our usual condition; to be open is anomalous, even excessive. 

A wide-eyed girl is extreme in her unliddedness, her bare membranes flinching at any contact, vulnerable to motes, to smuts, to dryness. A wide-hipped girl extends the splayed arches of her body to bridge the generational divide. A wide-legged girl unseals a portal between persons; she is disturbing to the extent that she is open to all comers, a trapdoor that must be shut for safety’s sake. A wide-eyed girl is often thought desirable; a wide-hipped girl is often thought eligible; a wide-legged girl is often thought deplorable. A wide-legged girl is rarely wide-eyed, though she may have started out that way.

We can understand why Milton, in the narrowing orbit of his blindness, would have considered wideness, unboundedness to be threatening. What’s less clear is why the wideness of the wide-legged girl is also considered threatening. Does the wideness of the wide-legged girl evoke a kind of blindness, a dark room where one might blunder into strangers, the way two men once met each other in me?
3. hide
“But why hide it in a hole?” asks the Master, returning from his long absence, sparks of bewilderment flaring into rage. 

An unanswered question worries at the Parable of the Talents: why is the Master so terribly angry? It is not as if the servant had stolen the money, or spent it—his sin is one of omission, of overly risk-averse investing. A talent was a unit of weight in ancient Greece: in monetary terms, it was worth eighty pounds of silver, or 6,000 denarii—nearly twenty years’ wages for the average worker. But Milton uses the word in its more modern sense, dating from the fifteenth century: a natural ability or skill.

How did a word for a deadweight of metal come to mean something inborn, innate? Confusion between the inorganic and the natural trickles into the parable and the poem. The Master prides himself on being a man who reaps where he has not sown and gathers where he did not scatter seed. Was the servant’s fault to confuse coins for seeds, did he think he was planting when he was merely burying, did he mistake for viable what had no chance of living, what had never been alive?
4. bent
And what about the hole, which for so long had held treasure? Did it wonder why — despite all the moistness and richness it could muster — those cold, glinting seeds never sprouted? Did it understand that, if released into the wider world, the coins could have quickened, multiplied? That instead of an incubator, the hole had become an oubliette, a place where otherwise fruitful things were sent to languish, to become lodged, useless?

“Useless” — a word like a capped lead pipe, like the extra bone in my foot I will never pass down to my daughter.

A thing becomes useless if it is bent out of shape. To “get bent” is to be put to another kind of use, a use my therapist considered tantamount to rape. To bend is to be bound, to bow down without breaking, with perhaps just the head tilted at an angle so as to peer upward.
5. present
The Master has become the Maker. The servile body wholly “his,” splayed wide in a welcome-home, bound up in a beribboned bow. 

But the reader will object. This is all wrong. First of all, in the sonnet, “bent” doesn’t mean to bow down as if in submission to an outside force, but instead denotes an innate or internalized tendency or inclination. Second, a “present” is not a gift, but a verb meaning to offer openly, full-faced, the sun beaming down on a clean page. Third, the body never comes into it at all.
“Therewith” — a safe word, a strongbox to be buried.6. chide
Is a “true account” a story or a sum? Is the Maker an audience or an auditor? 

The page scoured white by little grains of fear.

A story has an ending. A sum has a bottom line. There was no accounting for me because my allotment leaked out of me, month after month, I scrubbed the sheets as if effacing the marks of a crime.

Then one day the fear reversed itself. Like a photo negative but in higher contrast—its whites more glaring and its darks more glossy, as if a whisper-thin suspicion had come unzipped.

“Chide” is an enormous understatement. The servant isn’t merely scolded, he is cast into “the outer darkness” where there is “weeping and gnashing of teeth.” If the “outer darkness” is deemed to be a punishment, then does that lustrous inner darkness count as a reward?
7. denied
It seems unfair, is Milton’s point. To be assigned a task, but not provided sufficient materials to complete it, is to be placed in a situation of contrived scarcity, like a lab rat or like the youngest sister in a fairy tale.

The Parable of the Wise and Foolish Virgins—which prefaces the Parable of the Talents — centers on this scarcity. The virgins wait for the bridegroom, to greet him with lamps alight. Five virgins have brought extra flasks of oil, but five virgins have let their lamps burn out and must go lampless into the night to look for oil. That much we are told, but questions hover around the shadowed margins of the story. Why isn’t the bridegroom with the bride? Why is he so delayed? Why is the bridegroom met in the middle of the night by a phalanx of lamp-bearing virgins, like a troupe of pom-pom girls or like a sacrificial rite?

The virginity of the virgins renders them piquant, memorable. Adorning gothic portals, evoking thresholds, entrances, they are a particular feature of French cathedrals—much more so, one suspects, than if the parable had called them “maidservants” or even “bridesmaids.”

The presumed desideratum of the story does not interest us much: the sated bridegroom at the midnight feast, the smug, unctuous faces of the wise virgins. Instead, the imagination pursues the foolish virgins rushing into the night, their desperation making them vulnerable, their vulnerability making them erotic, the fill-holes of their useless lamps dark and slick with oil. Is this how I was taught to sexualize insufficiency, the lack that set me wandering night after night, my body too early emptied out?
8. prevent
“Prevent” — a word like a white sheet folded back to cover the mouth.

A white egg bursts from the ovary and falls away, leaving a star-shaped scar. Corpus albicans, the whitening body. Such starbursts, at first, are scattered constellations, frost embroidering a dark field. But at what point does this white lacework shift over from intricacy to impossibility, opacity, obstacle—the ice disc clogging the round pond, the grid of proteins baffling the eye?

“Prevent” — a word that slams shut, a portcullis (Latin: cataracta).

Letter to Leonard Philaras, September 28, 1654: “the dimness which I experience by night and day, seems to incline more to white than to black.”
9. need
Has Patience been looming in the background all along, silent, so as not to intrude upon a blind man’s consciousness? Patience, whose garment is “white and close-fitting so that it is not blown about or disturbed by the wind.”

At the turn of the sonnet, Patience pries open its sculpted lips, its stiff tongue like a weaver’s shuttle drawing woolly strands through the warp and weft of Milton’s blindness, a white monologue that admits neither interruption nor rejoinder.

Milton’s little murmur stitched back into his mouth.

Woven tight enough to repel need — a liquid beading on the surface, the blood the needles drew from me week after week, hundreds of stoppered vials consigned to the biohazard bin, en route to the incinerator.

“Need,” from the High German, for danger.

“Murmur,” from the Sanskrit, a crackling fire.
10. best
The best beam in contentment, ranging themselves in rows. Erect as test tubes but forswearing undue pride in such uprightness, mustering shoulder-to-shoulder with the fellow-elect. The best arrayed in regimental ranks, in refrigerated racks, white hymn of the unneeded, white hum of the unneeding.

“Best,” originally superlative of bot (Old English: remedy, reparation).

The best affect a pious pose, mouths held taut in tongueless Os. Sotto voce chorus of that soft, subjunctive song: if you were complete ... if you were replete ...

Superlative. The most remediated. The most repaired.
11. state
To be scooped out, emptied of need and rinsed clean of its greasy smears, pristine as a petri dish on a stainless lab table. Enucleated, the white of the egg awaiting an unknown yolk.

“Yolk” from geolu (Old English: yellow). Not to be confused with “yoke” from geocian (Old English: to be joined together). A yoke is an implement, meant to be used, to fill a need. But where there is no field to be plowed, no wagon to be pulled, why demand a yoke that is useless, needless?

One day the Romans sent for Cincinnatus to lead the republic against the invading Aequian army. He laid down his plow in the field and went to war. When the Aequians surrendered, Cincinnatus spared their lives but decreed that they must “pass under the yoke.” The Romans fashioned a yoke from three spears, two fixed in the ground, and one tied across the tops of the two verticals. Since the horizontal spear was only a few feet off the ground, the Aequians were made to crouch down like animals in order to complete the surrender. This is thought to be the origin of the word “subjugate,” to be brought under the yoke. To bear a yoke is to be bowed down, oxbowed, cowed.

One day they laid me down on a gurney, my feet strapped in stirrups, my legs bent and splayed like the horns of a white bull.
12. speed
But why would Milton, of all people, use the word “Kingly” as a compliment? Roundheaded Milton, who wrote tract after tract in defense of regicide, who would later be detained for opposing the Restoration?

At this point, our suspicions are confirmed: Milton has disappeared entirely from the poem. We haven’t heard from him since the turn of the sonnet. We’ve been lulled by the cadenced voice of Patience, its dusty tongue self-lubricating, its pallid breath clouding the room, precipitating frangible chains of hydrocarbons, their branchings barbed like fluffs of eiderdown. Through the faint reticulations, we discern no dark stoop-shouldered figure, but only white-robed forms, upright as if hung from hooks, their faces unyielding as lanterns, shuttered as if once aflame.
13. rest
Rest — a word like a gauze bandage, a ropy weave of collagen knitting its way across a wound. Outspread as if fingered, gelid gestures suggesting solace: to stanch, to shield, to seal, to shut off.

Rest — the rind of the best, a contoured pod that cradles the shape of what it doesn’t hold.

Rest — those who are left when thousands have sped away, the bereft, who litter the land, with husks for hands, vacant-eyed, vacant faces raised like basins under a contrail-scarred sky.
14. wait
To stand and wait is a task far weightier than simply to wait. It is to permit the distractible body neither ease nor action, nor food nor drink nor any such reprieve; it is to pit the body in enmity against its own heaviness.

To abide in readiness as in a winter orchard, the lacerated land bandaged in snow. To exist inert as if limbless, skin seamless as if reknit over what had been pruned away, knotted rootstock fit for no other service: no branch, no leaf, no fruit. To persist as a stripped stick persists in a white field, bark peeled back from one exposed split, uptilted as if eager for the grafted slip.

To stand and wait for the one who reaps where he has not sown.

Mercy sugars the starving soil with nitrogen, potassium, phosphate. Mercy captures rain in silver beads and stitches them through the threadbare weave of cloud. Mercy wields a scalpel cutting a cleft in the lopped-off stump, mercy forces home the rootless wand, mercy seals the join with tar and tape.

To foster the raw scion as if it were a son, to siphon light down through its body as if it were your own.
~~~
So I'll speak ill of the dead. A was crooked,
planting the small left finger of the raccoon in the upholstery
before he sold the car. B made certain to point out Celia's
bewildered look before her pink slip came in the flimsy institution.
In the videos of C, a jejune overwhelmed the cast.
D built dollhouses. Even Lonnie down at Shell
found him less a man for it, the night they went off to see the stock
cars break. I wanted E's hair, but by the end it was no more. F
refused alms, pulling the man up by his shirt in the street, and
G sought rewards. Marybeth said H fondled her for sport.
Now you, I, Smokey, hell
bent on a village version of Club 21, embarrassed by our attentions.
Mistrust it was. Dig me a chamber of preparedness.
                                                                          William T. Osborn, 1964-1993
~~~
Doctor, you say there are no haloes
around the streetlights in Paris
and what I see is an aberration
caused by old age, an affliction.
I tell you it has taken me all my life
to arrive at the vision of gas lamps as angels,
to soften and blur and finally banish
the edges you regret I don’t see,
to learn that the line I called the horizon
does not exist and sky and water,
so long apart, are the same state of being.
Fifty-four years before I could see
Rouen cathedral is built
of parallel shafts of sun,
and now you want to restore
my youthful errors: fixed
notions of top and bottom,
the illusion of three-dimensional space,
wisteria separate
from the bridge it covers.
What can I say to convince you
the Houses of Parliament dissolve
night after night to become
the fluid dream of the Thames?
I will not return to a universe
of objects that don’t know each other,
as if islands were not the lost children
of one great continent.  The world
is flux, and light becomes what it touches,
becomes water, lilies on water,
above and below water,
becomes lilac and mauve and yellow
and white and cerulean lamps,
small fists passing sunlight
so quickly to one another
that it would take long, streaming hair
inside my brush to catch it.
To paint the speed of light!
Our weighted shapes, these verticals,
burn to mix with air
and change our bones, skin, clothes
to gases.  Doctor,
if only you could see
how heaven pulls earth into its arms
and how infinitely the heart expands
to claim this world, blue vapor without end.
~~~
(a found poem, composed entirely of e-mails from various high school students)



If I were to ask you a question about your book
and sum it up into one word it would be, Why?
I think I like Walt Whitman better than you. I just don't
get literature, but for a fast hour and a half read, your book
 
takes the cake. I like how you organized the lines
in that one poem to represent a growing twisting bonsai tree.
Are you going to get a rude reaction when you meet
that one guy in that one poem? I guess you never know.
 
You are very young to be a poet. I also like how your poems take
up an entire page (it makes our reading assignment go faster).
In class we spend so much time dissecting your poems
and then deeply analyzing them. I think I like Walt Whitman
 
better than you, but don’t take offense—you are very good too!
You are young, You are young and pure and really just want
to have a good time. Thank you we have taken a debate
and you are a far better poet than Walt Whitman. And I loved
 
how your poems were easy to read and understand. Hello
my name is Alicia. We read you book and I just loved it.
We also read Walt Whitman’s Leaves of Grass. There
was no competition there. I liked your book a whole lot better.
 
It was an easy read. But poetry is not my favorite type
of literature. Sometimes I am offered drinks and guys
try to talk to me but I too just brush it off and keep dancing.
Every once and a while the creepy mean guys try to offer you
 
things and then they say something. What would you do?
Lastly, I was wondering if you ever wrote a poem that really
didn’t have a deeper meaning but everyone still tried
to give it one anyways? Walt Whitman is better than you.
~~~
The jay streaks through the lilacs
                        in color clash.
I note down: Invent
            outdoor birdswing
                                                            so birds drunk
on berries fall off in plaid
            in front of my window.
                                                                        I file it.  After all,
 
the pussy willow’s barely tufted—
                                                                        I have time.
            At the drain, lifting its feet,
                        a Modigliani bird—another invention?
The brook agrees
                        so brookishly, gulping at runoff
                                    like a bear in spring,
            like my husband. He didn’t trust my patents:
           
                        the squirrel-free gutter chain
                                    the collapsing arthritic’s cane
                        a lever for pulling old stumps
                                                in heavy rain.
 
But every act harbors a corresponding gadget.
 
                                    It is that way with God:
adjusting the acorn, locking the tree.
              With the womb, He was clearly Italianate,
the bulbous lines, the excess.
            I often think of Him
                        humming Beatles songs like me, over
                                    six Mason jars of pickling—
my offspring?
                        The dog laughs. You heard it:
a choke, then black gums, a frothing irony.
              He’s all wet from rescuing bones                            from the brook. He drops them in,                                                                                  then goes in after.            The brook’s rising with bones and I’m afraid

            the electricity will fail. Will the dog

 

                                  save me with his laughing?

                        That’s what this invention’s for:            the automatic rosebush waterer,

                          hooked to the sun and this wheel,
in perpetuity. Once a pirate working
on my outboard told me, Betty, better sand
              trickling in the hourglass than a shifting dune.
                                                       Even the Sudanese
plant borders of aloe against the drifts.
              But I like the look of roses.
 
              Oh, that’s the husband at the door, scratching.
Nights his furry self stands naked
                            before me, until the dog
removes his stuffing.
                                       O bear! Only by opening
              the blinds do I see he’s bleeding.
                            It’s him, not me, aching
                                        with overdue maternity.
                            A simple drawerful of cobwebs
              kept for emergency does for him,
                            self-sticking,
 
                                         then together we apprise
                                                                      the chimney,
              holding hands and chatting about the soot stains.
                        That was in winter before he died, the deft
                                                air stealing all we were speaking.
 
                                                                                                   Yesterday
                          a patent came for my speech retrieval unit,
              an unusual event, even for me, because
                           the government usually can’t get
past the drawings. And these were intricate:
              I had the duck by the neck, her feet
                          in food coloring, each step
              inked in. It all made sense—listen
to the ducks now. And just in time for the aspect—
                          ghosts are aspects, aren’t they?
              Of all but speech I have memory,
                                          that one sense shy of mimicry.
 
                           In the spring, now, in fact,
I take the blackfly larvae off rocks
                                                       in the rapids.
               On toast, pre-maggot, the very eggs
                            of mortality, eating them I figure
               I can lure Death itself, a raccoon
washing and washing in the dark,
                            and from there, patent the trap.
            I’ll be rich if its works.
                        Works, go the frogs, works, works.
~~~
At the Oriental Institute, Chicago



They redid King Tut splendid, once stone-huge as this yet his wife’s feet tiny, the only thing of her nowlow, next to him. A few toes, some of the rest, a bit of ankle, that’s itin the shade of her husband’s looming, massive looking straight ahead into the future where we live and can’teye-to-eye, where to stare at himis to suffer warbler neck, head back and upà la the high just-leafing-out trees as bright bitswing their blinkand hide. Little wife, such small feet, the thought dwarfs the king as ache, as what is ever left of us and oh, I like her better.
~~~
There was once a little animal,
   No bigger than a fox,And on five toes he scampered
   Over Tertiary rocks.They called him Eohippus,
   And they called him very small,And they thought him of no value --
   When they thought of him at all;For the lumpish old Dinoceras
   And Coryphodon so slowWere the heavy aristocracy
   In days of long ago.Said the little Eohippus,
   “I am going to be a horse!And on my middle finger-nails
   To run my earthly course!I’m going to have a flowing tail!
   I’m going to have a mane!I’m going to stand fourteen hands high
   On the psychozoic plain!”The Coryphodon was horrified,
   The Dinoceras was shocked;And they chased young Eohippus,
   But he skipped away and mocked.Then they laughed enormous laughter,
   And they groaned enormous groans.And they bade young Eohippus
   Go view his father’s bones.Said they, “You always were as small
   And mean as now we see,And that’s conclusive evidence
   That you’re always going to be.What! Be a great, tall, handsome beast,
   With hoofs to gallop on?Why! You’d have to change your nature!     Said the Loxolophodon.They considered him disposed of,
   And retired with gait serene;That was the way they argued
   In “the early Eocene”.There was once an Anthropoidal Ape,
   Far smarter than the rest,And everything that they could do
   He always did the best;So they naturally disliked him
   And they gave him shoulders cool,And when they had to mention him
   They said he was a fool.Cried this pretentious Ape one day,
   “I’m going to be a man!And stand upright, and hunt, and fight,
   And conquer all I can!I’m going to cut down forest trees,
   To make my houses higher!I’m going to kill the Mastodon!
   I’m going to make a fire!”Loud screamed the Anthropoidal Apes
   With laughter wild and gay;They tried to catch that boastful one,
   But he always got away.So they yelled at him in chorus,
   Which he minded not a whit;And they pelted him with cocoanuts,
   Which didn’t seem to hit.And then they gave him reasons
   Which they thought of much avail,To prove how his preposterous
   Attempt was sure to fail.Said the sages, “In the first place,
   The thing cannot be done!And, second, if it could be,
   It would not be any fun!And, third, and most conclusive,
   And admitting no reply,You would have to change your nature!
   We should like to see you try!”They chuckled then triumphantly,
   These lean and hairy shapes,For these things passed as arguments
   With the Anthropoidal Apes.There was once a Neolithic Man,
   An enterprising wight,Who made his chopping implements
   Unusually bright.Unusually clever he,
   Unusually brave,And he drew delightful Mammoths
   On the borders of his cave.To his Neolithic neighbours,
   Who were startled and surprised,Said he, “My friends, in course of time,
   We shall be civilized!We are going to live in cities!
   We are going to fight in wars!We are going to eat three times a day
   Without the natural cause!We are going to turn life upside down
   About a thing called gold!We are going to want the earth, and take
   As much as we can hold!We are going to wear great piles of stuff
   Outside our proper skins!We are going to have Diseases!
   And Accomplishments!! And Sins!!!”Then they all rose up in fury
   Against their boastful friend,For prehistoric patience
   Cometh quickly to an end.Said one, “This is chimerical!
   Utopian! Absurd!”Said another, “What a stupid life!
   Too dull, upon my word!”Cried all, Before such things can come,
   You idiotic child,You must alter Human Nature!”
   And they all sat back and smiled.Thought they, “An answer to that last
   It will be hard to find!”It was a clinching argument
   To the Neolithic Mind!
~~~
                      based on photographs from Rural Japan:
                      Radiance of the Ordinary
 




/ afloat
two boats with no riders
still moving on water
the hulls barely touching
each with a single oar
safely propped
so it won’t fall
/ lotus leaves
close into themselves
at night
on their wide folded backs
water beads
inside, their sleeping
flowers
/ inside
do the carp
just below the water’s stillness
see the pines
/ fall daikon
just pulled from the soil
these pungent roots
hang from bamboo poles
their white tubed bodies
bend as if slightly aroused
each ripe radish will
be drenched
in salt
then eaten raw
all winter
/ lone pine
ancient tree
with so many tongues
how long this throated stem
this stillness before rain
~~~
Two girls discover   
the secret of life   
in a sudden line of   
poetry.
I who don’t know the   
secret wrote   
the line. They   
told me
(through a third person)   
they had found it
but not what it was   
not even
what line it was. No doubt   
by now, more than a week   
later, they have forgotten   
the secret,
the line, the name of   
the poem. I love them   
for finding what   
I can’t find,
and for loving me   
for the line I wrote,   
and for forgetting it   
so that
a thousand times, till death   
finds them, they may   
discover it again, in other   
lines
in other   
happenings. And for   
wanting to know it,   
for
assuming there is   
such a secret, yes,   
for that   
most of all.
~~~
Your voice crawls across the dashboard of Grandma’s Dodge Dynasty on the way home from Lilydale First Baptist. You sing a cocktail of static and bass. Sound like you dressed to the nines: cowboy hat, fur coat & alligator boots. Sound like you lotion every tooth. You a walking discography, South Side griot, keeper of crackle & dust in the grooves. You fell in love with a handmade box of wires at 16 and been behind the booth ever since. From wbez to V103, you be the Coolest Gent, King of the Dusties. Your voice wafts down from the ceiling at the Hair Lab. You supply the beat for Kym to tap her comb to. Her brown fingers paint my scalp with white grease to the tunes of Al & Barry & Luther. Your voice: an inside-out yawn, the sizzle of hot iron on fresh perm, the song inside the blackest seashell washed up on a sidewalk in Bronzeville. You soundtrack the church picnic, trunk party, Cynthia’s 50th birthday bash, the car ride to school, choir, Checkers. Your voice stretch across our eardrums like Daddy asleep on the couch. Sound like Grandma’s sweet potato pie, sound like the cigarettes she hide in her purse for rough days. You showed us what our mommas’ mommas must’ve moved to. When the West Side rioted the day MLK died, you were audio salve to the burning city, people. Your voice a soft sermon soothing the masses, speaking coolly to flames, spinning black records across the airwaves, spreading the gospel of soul in a time of fire. Joycetta says she bruised her thumbs snappin’ to Marvin’s “Got to Give It Up” and I believe her.
~~~
I have just returned from a visit to my pier
Often I am permitted to return to my pier
For a long time I would go to pier early
So much depends upon a pier
This is an old pier
I celebrate my pier, and what I assume . . .
I had a pier
There is a certain slant of pier
On woman's first disobedience, and the pier
Christmas won't be Christmas without the pier
I wandered lonely as a pier
Pier was spiteful
This is just to say I have eaten the pier
~~~
He dwelt among “apartments let,”       About five stories high; A man I thought that none would get,       And very few would try. A boulder, by a larger stone       Half hidden in the mud, Fair as a man when only one       Is in the neighborhood. He lived unknown, and few could tell       When Jacob was not free; But he has got a wife,—and O!       The difference to me!
~~~
I have lived it, and lived it,
My nervous, luxury civilisation,
My sugar-loving nerves have battered me to pieces.... Their idea of literature is hopeless.
Make them drink their own poetry!
Let them eat their gross novel, full of mud. 
~~~
All morning, you’ve studied the laws   of spoons, the rules of books, the dynamics   of the occasional plate, observed the principles   governing objects in motion and objects   at rest.  To see if it will fall, and if it does,   how far, if it will rage like a lost penny   or ring like a Chinese gong—because   it doesn’t have to—you lean from your chair   and hold your cup over the floor.   It curves in your hand, it weighs in your palm,    it arches like a wave, it is a dipper   full of stars, and you’re the wind timing   the pull of the moon, you’re the water   measuring the distance from which we fall.
~~~
Fawns in the winter wood
Who feel their horns, and leap,
Swans whom the bleakening mood
Of evening stirs from sleep,
Tall flowers that unfurl
As a moth, driven, flies,
Flowers with the breasts of a girl
And sea-cold eyes.
The bare bright mirrors glow
For their enchanted shapes.
Each is a flame, and so,
Like flame, escapes.
~~~
      1
 
an urban image from the eighties
when we hung out at Chez Madam Arthur
and at the back of the room
women wrapped their arms around
nights of ink and dawn
 
 
      2
 
calendar of murmurs
vague caresses about the planet and its water
we could have confused words
but there were doors open
confetti in the midst of darkness
gentle ways
to swoon in a corner with she who
put her tongue in my mouth
 
 
      3
 
focus on yes, on the woman’s
eyelids
caress not silence not word
focus beyond. Hold me back
~~~
The shadows of birds fading on a fighter’s back
 
The undressing of words on an unstamped postcard
 
The wet swings in the distant park
 
The jealousy of raindrops on the umbrella of lovers
 
The laughter of a boy before a bird
 
The song of two flutes, two swords, two bracelets, two fingers
 
The stare of a wave before a pearl
 
The yearning between the legs of a farmer’s wife
 
The opening of doors             closing midday
 
The sudden howling of our muse—and
 les éventails—disturbing the guest inside of us
~~~
They call it sacrifice—            imagine me a tiny poppy
            on a field of green felt—brief blip of color,
                        limitless expanse. I’ve never felt foreign,
or like a lash in his eye. If it’s not love, it’s
                        very like. Most days it feels the same—
            exacting—he tweezes the stray
thoughts from my speech, cleans up my
            heart with a tortoiseshell comb.
Every lady should have such a man,
            edging her lawn with a sharp rotary blade.
                        Year by year—let’s call it always—
            editor and editrix. Engaged
                        against a flurry of typos, showered in
revisionist white out. I erase his crow’s feet,
            buff away his frown. My head—he
yawns it open, scoops out dark foam,
            yesses I’ve regretted, the tiny poppy
everyone sees flapping to pieces—
And so, we are growing taller, sweeter,
ratified in the glow of the big correction.
~~~
For Marina﻿



You say the old masters never got it wrong,But when Goya painted the death of the imaginationIt was a lost dog against a usurious yellow skyAnd the dog, a hapless creature who had drawn itselfTen miles on two legs, stared in amazementTo see the man who once fed him from his plateReduced to this. So I felt this week, the vile soil and everything upon it—The beggar guest kicked from the tableBefore his own dog, and even the honest unpickingOf art performed nightly and in seclusion.Like any Penelope my armor is resignationAlthough I thought I would lift the bow myselfAnd draw.By the morning he is goneAnd what to make of this?The prostitutes hang from a beam like miceThe suitors are piled unburied in the yard.And some say that it is now much betterAnd others, that it is worse.So order was restoredI stared in amazement                                               •Perhaps Akhmatova was rightWhen she wrote who knows what shitWhat tip, what pile of wasteBrings forth the tender verseLike hogweed, like the fat hen under the fenceLike the unbearable present tenseWho knows what ill, what strifeWhat crude shack of a lifeAnd how it twists sweetly about the broken sill:Pressingness, another word for honeysuckleBut housewives? Has poetryEver deepened in the pailWas it ever found in the sink, under the tableDid it rise in the oven, quietly ableTo outhowl the hoover?Does it press more than the children’s supperThe sudden sleepless wail?Did it ever?It lives. It takes seedLike the most unforgiving weedGrows wilder as the child grows olderAnd spits on dreams, did I sayHow it thrives in the ashen family nest Or how iambs are measured bestWhere it hurts:With the heel of an iron On the reluctant breast Of a shirt?                                               ﻿•                              MICHAEL BLANNThere was a hush, then Michael BlannStepped out onto the stage. MichaelBlann, with his pipe and his jukebox headOh, he’s your man.He has a song for all weathers, a pipeAnd a voice, and he sings and he roamsHe sings to the wind and a dog of howThe trees are all bare and Jack’s come home.He’s a thin voice, like a spider thread On days when the sun is late and fineLive and let live, sings Michael BlannThe wind yields not, but the hills is mine.He’s no call for fate passing overHis sheep are all angels, the stars are his LordsHe’ll play any part the clouds should fancyTo humble tunes and hand-me-down wordsThe acts are written in briar strandsAnd the Pharisees are leaves in the airI likes a drop pipes Michael BlannSing follow hark forward the innocent hare. He wore to his end a clutch of sheep’s wool To show the gods that Michael BlannWent alone, alone for most of his yearsBut crossed the hills a singing man.
~~~
For Marilyn who died in January



april 1 
found on our driveway
  like a feather dropped     by a crow
 

  8 of spades,        a playing    card /
 

       we played Crazy Eights, slapping        cards or holding them        as if they were birds that might fly        out of our hands 
decades ago, in our childhood
       like the translucent, whirling        image I imagine, prismatic and phosphorescent —         a murmuration of starlings swooping        and iridescent 
but it dissolved onto a gray wall, undecorated
       / glimpses of us wearing our        velvet Sunday best dresses, yours        usually crimson, mine blue
 

       we never had nice shoes. 
Now you have returned to water
 thanks to the Neptune Society spreading        your ashes over the Pacific
 
 
 april 2
 
Ceylon tea — that amber cup
            from Sri Lanka, popularly known here, before
            Americans became tea drinkers, as
                 Orange Pekoe;
                        our mother hated
                        so many things — 
                                              tea was
                                   rattlesnake venom to
                                                                     her
            I embraced it  ///
            What did you drink, Marilyn? I saw you only
with a Coke or a glass of wine in your hand?
Our mother whom you felt
damaged you / your life       spirals, the twisting iridescent birds
              fly at me now                       scintillating, spinning
                                     I blink
(Our mother drank many cups of coffee with cream a day.)
Our sad mother
                                   I blink
                                   and tell it to go back to our childhood
                                   of muddy little shoes from walking in
                                   the spider-filled orange groves.
There, the damaging must have Begun  / she
                                   loving me so much
                                                                      more
                                                                      than you.
I wish there had been more stories
like the one about the origin of her disliking tea
            at 17, she went to celebrate being made teacher
            of the one-room school she had attended and
            graduated from at her retiring teacher’s
            home, she was served for the first time — tea, she
            being from a German coffee-drinking family.
            Our mother hated it but politely choked it down.
            Would never again touch a drop of the
            poisonous beverage.
From that story, we learned that
our mother ritualized hating something — expected us
to admire her for it.
                        I took
                        that negative pattern
                        and spun it until I could have cloth enough
for an eloquent garment. Perhaps the lesson simply made you
feel yourself            helpless         ragged                      torn
I never
saw you that way, Marilyn,
though perhaps incomplete.
I pour a cup of Assam. Take a sip,
            let it wash through my mouth,
                        down my age-damaged throat,
think
of you sitting
with me in your Southern California 
backyard one May morning
next to the camellia bush.
I, as always with a cup of tea in my hand.
You, smoking.
I left all my family — you were part of it — 
left California and reinvented myself, even
mythologized myself as a tan “California Girl.”
You did not become an artist or a poet.
I suppose that’s why you felt damaged.
If only you knew how much imagination and sacrifice
it took for me to get away.
                        So many small things
                                   can save us
                                             from the damage
you talked of. For me, drinking that
first cup of Orange Pekoe
and making tea
my drink      risking rattlesnake poison
with every steaming cup,
a tiny emblem of a rebellion I still try to practice.
You left us so quickly, Marilyn,
and without any warning this January,
your house full of cancelled aspirations — glass
bowls, and cylinders, and huge globes
filled with sea scallop shells
            you combed the California seashores to 
                        find, collecting these empty shells, washed
free of their biological life.                                 Out of the ocean:
we two different daughters of a sailor.
 
april 3 
The spinning                      the scissors               the measuring
and thus our lives are given out
from the heavens, with unfair allotments
and varied, unaccountable fates,
born when we are, and to whom
you would have prevailed
in an age where women had to spin,
weave the material, cut it into britches and dresses,
undergarments and sheets, sew
and keep clean, warm, and comfortable a
household full or a castle full / men
children, hired hands, maidservants — you would have
done it
so well.
But you would have died young in such a world — 
diabetes, asthma, chronic bronchial infections
even in the 21st century where you lived to be
76       a world where all your skills were plied as
            substitute
for being an artist.
                      When I asked you a year ago,
not knowing that you would die this January,
what you would most like to have, if
money were not the object
             — since clearly all your measuring, cutting, and sewing
            had been for economical reasons,
            not art — 
you thought for a bit, raising your chin.
“A swimming pool in my backyard. One I could
step into every morning, swim, float — maybe in the afternoon
I’d go for a dip. Many evenings, I think,” she said
to me.                     Longing for some ocean? 
In our portrait,
if someone paints it, she will be 
sitting in a scallop shell,
her many jars of seashells behind her head. I
will be invisible, except for the spinning 
murmuration of birds that radiates
            past me. 
They read at her funeral, a poem from her journal
about lying on the beach,
the sand embracing her.
How much she loved it / felt safe,
felt released. Oh, Marilyn, all
those seashells emptied of their living
fleshy occupants. (the ugly parts that die and rot) now
glorious empty rooms
            in which to live an imaginary life,
                        to decorate,
to create beauty, 
            spaces to live
                        a different life.
What is left but your desires, locked in glass, and
an image of you walking
your beloved beaches, hands 
full of seashells, your
footprints measured, then quickly filled 
with the tidal flow.
 
april 4 
my spinning, 
            a whirlpool of faceted moving lights
                        Everything is Numbers!
down into a vortical glare that replaces
            my own mind’s desire 
                        Everything is Numbers! Everything is Numbers!
floating down
            like the crow’s
                        onyx feather
the 8
            of spades
                        random card
appearing
            last week
                        over gravel
8 legs on a spider,
            the arachnid so many people seem to
            fear, yet I lose track of time, stare into the wall
            or any space to replace real images with my imaginary
            ones, some random spider, who spins my fate
Crazy Eights, the child card game Marilyn and I played
pieces of eight, the dollar of
            pirate Spain — our childhood in Orange County
8, a vertical infinity sign
            everything is numbers / your
                        fire opal that Daddy brought
to you from India, and our mother
paid a jeweler to set it
into a ring. You wore the ring
more than sixty years. I suppose it was
on your finger at death
spinning,     spinning
to scintillate and iridesce
            We never had nice shoes.
 
april 5 
Easter Sunday. You and I always dyed
Easter eggs together, our mother busy at
her forty-hour-a-week bookkeeper’s job. I 
was intrigued with the colors,
but they never turned out so bright when
coloring the eggs. You, the artist,
were interested in the designs
to transfer onto the eggs,
cartoons, bunnies,
chicks.
We kept our eggs
separated from each other,
put them in separate bowls, neither
caring for the other’s creation. Still we
felt connected, even joyful, on those few holiday projects.
Not enough to make us friends.
My unwillingness to be like our classmates
embarrassed you. You chose invisibility
in school, rather than being known as “Diane’s
Sister.” 
That unwillingness to be like others 
was what made me a poet. So many little things, but that early decision
of yours, not to understand why I wanted to be weird,
is what made you make so 
many other small choices, preventing you 
from becoming an artist. “Look away,” our mother said to us,
when there were ugly things confronting us. 
I could not do that. You blame
our mother, yet it was you who decided to look away,
even though it meant not seeing the whole world,
even if meant you didn’t become an artist.
Poverty, of course, was the reason
we never had nice shoes.
 
april 6 
All numbers have
disappeared
                        instead
            there are mushrooms
            fungi that has always seemed
            more artful than tasty
            Sipping a cup of tea / soothes me
            as the mushrooms in a veloute sauce
            never could.
            I feel stymied / a rider
            with no horse. I want only to watch
            the stories unfold / the secret stories about why
            you chose to marry and have children / why
            I did not / the stories
                                    I try to banish
            blot out, replace with the diamond
            dog. A murmuration of iridescent starlings, 
            and the spider of eight, 
            twirling on its silk line, projecting infinity      art
            is made when you subject yourself
            to the unacceptable, then dredge
            yourself out,
                                    find a mineral replacement:
            infinity
            iridescer
            irised feather
            scintillater
                        a crystalline body whirls
            releasing me from
            the history, the stories it’s
            so hard to tell.
Until recent years, my sister
and I either ignored or disliked each other.
We fought continuously as children.
I have in my wrist a black bump that
protrudes near a vein.
                                    It’s the point of a pencil
that broke off and penetrated my wrist as we struggled
for the long yellow weapon.
A pencil, the weapon of a writer. But there was 
no bleeding, no seeming-wound to be dressed. 
We never told
our Mother, both too ashamed
of our brutality. I’ve never asked a doctor
about it, the pencil lead encapsulated
in my wrist. Nor ever spoken
of it to anyone.
I always wonder that so much must remain a secret?
Why
            we never had nice shoes.
 
april 7 
Young Marilyn, Old Marilyn.
there are places on this planet where
I find it hard to detect any beauty
therefore, silence
                        No nice shoes.
 
april 8 
there is silence
 
april 9 
Drinking
a blend of traditional
Darjeeling with a touch of Ceylon / this
tea takes me back to a Viennese visit, drinking
this very tea in the afternoon while my friend, Jonathan,
ate their famous Sacher torte.
The tea
seemed particularly aromatic — 
            “lightly scented with oil of bergamot
            and a hint of genuine Bourbon vanilla.”
Wishing for the moment in the past to reappear. I didn’t know
the tea from the Sacher Hotel
was as famous as the cake
                                until I found in my Upton Tea catalogue
                                a listing for “Scented Darjeeling”
                                under the heading “Earl Grey Blends”
This tea,
any cup of tea!
Hard to believe. no! Sad to
think my Mother almost spat out her first taste
of tea.
What worldly thing must I touch to
bring Marilyn back into my
sedate life, my sister Marilyn who died in January? 
Her hand — I’d like to imagine timidly touching her
      hand — Marilyn’s hand.
            Her right hand on which she wore the fire opal ring.
                        In that hand she’d be holding a cigarette.
Smoke and fire makes me think of her — 
            not water, though it was that Pacific ocean 
                        filled with seashells
                                    that she was in touch with. My old hands,
not really like hers at all. She had big hands for shaping things,
            while mine are small,      like birds.
~~~
Everything is made of everything.
— Leonardo da Vinci



I found Rome in the woods.
Fair to admit it’s mostly
tundra to the west in the park, past Toklat
the Denali I revised, low grasslands
engineered to freeze deep
by October — this being Alaska — the great
            Tabularium close to the Temple of
            Castor and Pollux I rebuilt that same summer — 
            not superimposed, exact as any scheme
in secret — the Arch of Septimius Severus at the gravel bar
        where fox drank from a river turned stream,
           a Theater of Marcellus near
               the ranger station where one raven,
                                                                                    such a brat,
   complained of
                      my Circus Maximus, Trajan’s Column,
                              my Baths of Diocletian,
too many spots
soaked in unpronounceable Latin.
                    I really did, I shouldered bits of it,
      a ruin-hushed haunted business, my brain
                                                         a truck bed, a lift,
pulleys big as a whale’s heart,
expletives of cheap wonder all over
                                                                  my woodlot
and expanse.
                          One self-anoints to embellish
day, years, life thus far, and think oneself so ...    
                       Then busted — 
by a raven!
Well, that’s memory for you, that’s so-called
        civilization for you, to layer up,
                         to redo the already done.
I mean it’s a fact, the puny life span we’re allotted.
              And proof — Denali in August, fireweed,
spunky scrawny first Latinate — Erechtites hieracifolia — 
               giving off flowers to mark
               what weeks left, little
               time bomber, time traveler, ancient
               slips red-flagging the countdown to winter
               by climbing its own stalk.
Something perverse about that.
Something perfectly fiendishly self-conscious about that.
 
 • 
From the start perverse, any premise.
      Ask ... We can’t know. To be compelled
            makes an occasion. Rome’s grand
     past horrific, fire and ash, swamp into bog, lust
              and bloodlust — 
The Alaska Range dreams lurid as Rome,
                                        the worst
way below being fire, summer snow at night
      off the highest peaks by noon
              as distant from our cabin as the size
of a hand if I
                         held up the one with
                         an eye in the middle
to know how this works. Some have the power to
raise from the dead a before, before
scary and beautiful
           back to mystery cults, in caves, rubble
far under a Roman street, the altar to
Mithras still slaying his bull, crumbling the stonework.             All things being equal. But they’re not.
                    Agony, it’s older.
                      Ask the moose at Denali,
                         the snowshoe hare, the lynx,
such a wily courtly lot.
                                           Ask Ovid
      banished to his hovel on the Black Sea, aching
                for Rome’s exalted rude cacophony, each
      exiled month a big thick X down                                   Februarius,                                 Aprilis to home-shattered sick enough
for an undersong.
Look it up! Undersong: a strain; a droning;
the burden of a song — 
~~~
He started with the tune his mother had hummed
in Ohio, nostalgia he’d carried for years,
and by Sunday afternoon he had the words.
A triumph, already; he whistled the banjo’s part.
 
(Himself a sympathizer from the North,
called copperhead, called traitor by his own kin.)
 
Something lively, some git-up-and-git they’d wanted
and didn’t he deliver—
Miss Susan got seven encores the first night.
That gave them their tune, their Negro walk-around—
 Look away, look away, look away, they sang.
Vipers, that spring, spread thick on the ground.
~~~
What is mysterious about loss, flush of arm pulled from a wilted sleeve,summer’s urine-tang in autumn leaves?Let   John Keats light another fag.Or Brontë refuse the doctoron her black sateen settee.For whatever part of   you may be taken away, you said,is the scar I will visit firstwith my mouth, each time, as gold visits the thieved till, sun the obliterated sill, saying praise you for leavingme this you, this living still.
~~~
Alice cannot be in the poem, she says, because She's only a metaphor for childhood And a poem is a metaphor already So we'd only have a metaphor Inside a metaphor. Do you see? They all nod. They see. Except for the girl With her head in the rabbit hole. From this vantage, Her bum looks like the flattened backside Of  a black and white panda. She actually has one In the crook of  her arm. Of course it's stuffed and not living. Who would dare hold a real bear so near the outer ear? She's wondering what possible harm might come to her If  she fell all the way down the dark she's looking through. Would strange creatures sing songs Where odd syllables came to a sibilant end at the end. Perhaps the sounds would be a form of  light  hissing. Like when a walrus blows air Through two fractured front teeth. Perhaps it would Take the form of a snake. But if a snake, it would need a tree. Could she grow one from seed? Could one make a cat? Make it sit on a branch and fade away again The moment you told it that the rude noise it was hearing was          rational thought With an axe beating on the forest door.
~~~
I’m jotting down these lines,
having borrowed a pen from a waitress
in this roadside restaurant. Three rusty pines
prop up the sky in the windows.
My soup gets cold, which implies
I’ll eat it cold. Soon I too
will leave a tip on the table, merge
into the beehive of travelers
and board one of the ferries,
where there’s always a line to the loo
and no one knows where the captain is.
Slightly seasick, I keep on writing
of the wind-rose and lobster traps,
seagulls, if any—and there always are.
Check the air and you’ll see them
above straw hats and caps.
The sun at noon glides like a monstrous star-
fish through clouds. Others drink iced tea,
training binoculars on a tugboat.
When I finish this letter, I’ll take a gulp
from the flask you gave me for the road
in days when I was too young to care about
those on the pier who waved goodbye.
I miss them now: cousins in linen dresses,
my mother, you, boys in light summer shirts.
Life is too long. The compass needle dances.
Everything passes by. The ferry passes
by ragged yellow shores.
 
~~~
after Billie



these vitamin double ds
gonna put cows outta business.
these Sunday bests
if frozen would delight.
unpasteurized & untamed
they swing
in the hammock
of my torso.
they magnetize
my man's hands.
like a Wonder Woman blast
or a web of thunder from
Storm's wrist,
this cocktail
is nurturing napalm
manna dew, Pepto Bismol
for civilization.
you can't outwit these
aureolas.
these nipples are
necrophilia's enemy.
Coltrane couldn't blow
these tumescent tubas.
these are gourds
that'll make a shekere
obsolete,
make an eggplant
go pale.
these breasts
gonna put old Betsy
outta business
& send the men
with goats a-packin.
this love is like a faucet,
it turns on & on.
 
~~~
The famous Polish poet calls Simone de Beauvoir a Nazi hag
but to me she will always be her famous book,
the one with the Matisse paper cut on the cover,
a sad blue nude I took into the woods.
Where we college girls went to coax the big picture
from her, as if she could tell us how to use
all the strange blades on our Swiss Army knives—
the firewood we arranged in either log cabin or tepee,
a little house built to be burned down.
Which could be a metaphor:
Simone as the wind puffing the damp flames,
a cloud with a mouth that became obsolete
once we started using gasoline. Still,
she gave me one lesson that sticks, which is:
do not take a paperback camping in the rain
or it may swell to many times its original size,
and if you start with a big book you’ll end up
with a cinderblock. In that vein I pictured Simone as huge
until (much later) I read that her size was near-midget—
imagine, if we took Gertrude Stein, we’d be there still,
trying to build some kind of travois to drag her body out.
The other thing I remember, a word, immanence—
meaning, you get stuck with the cooking and laundry
while the man gets to hit on all your friends in Paris.
Sure you can put the wet book in the oven
and try baking it like a cake. But the seam will stay soggy
even when the pages rise, ruffled like French pastry.
As far as laundry goes, it’s best I steer clear,
what with my tendency to forget the tissues
wadded in my sleeves. What happens is
I think I’m being so careful, and everything
still comes out like the clearing where we woke.
Covered in flakes that were then the real thing:
snow. Which sounds more la-di-da in French.
But then the sun came up and all la neige vanished
like those chapters we grew bored with and had skipped.
 
~~~
          Philosophic
in its complex, ovoid emptiness,
a skillful pundit coined it as a sort
    of stopgap doorstop for those
           quaint equations           Romans never
dreamt of. In form completely clever
and discrete—a mirror come unsilvered,     loose watch face without the works,              a hollowed globe            from tip to toe
unbroken, it evades the grappling
hooks of mass, tilts the thin rim of no thing,     remains embryonic sum,             non-cogito.
~~~
The relief of putting your fingers on the keyboard,
as if you were walking on the beach
and found a diamond
as big as a shoe;
as if
you had just built a wooden table
and the smell of sawdust was in the air,
your hands dry and woody;
as if
you had eluded
the man in the dark hat who had been following you
all week;
the relief
of putting your fingers on the keyboard,
playing the chords of
Beethoven,
Bach,
Chopin
         in an afternoon when I had no one to talk to,
         when the magazine advertisement forms of soft sweaters
         and clean shining Republican middle-class hair
         walked into carpeted houses
         and left me alone
         with bare floors and a few books
I want to thank my mother
for working every day
in a drab office
in garages and water companies
cutting the cream out of her coffee at 40
to lose weight, her heavy body
writing its delicate bookkeeper’s ledgers
alone, with no man to look at her face,
her body, her prematurely white hair
in love
         I want to thank
my mother for working and always paying for
my piano lessons
before she paid the Bank of America loan
or bought the groceries
or had our old rattling Ford repaired.
I was a quiet child,
afraid of walking into a store alone,
afraid of the water,
the sun,
the dirty weeds in back yards,
afraid of my mother’s bad breath,
and afraid of my father’s occasional visits home,
knowing he would leave again;
afraid of not having any money,
afraid of my clumsy body,
that I knew
         no one would ever love
But I played my way
on the old upright piano
obtained for $10,
played my way through fear,
through ugliness,
through growing up in a world of dime-store purchases,
and a desire to love
a loveless world.
I played my way through an ugly face
and lonely afternoons, days, evenings, nights,
mornings even, empty
as a rusty coffee can,
played my way through the rustles of spring
and wanted everything around me to shimmer like the narrow tide
on a flat beach at sunset in Southern California,
I played my way through
an empty father’s hat in my mother’s closet
and a bed she slept on only one side of,
never wrinkling an inch of
the other side,
waiting,
waiting,
I played my way through honors in school,
the only place I could
talk
       the classroom,
       or at my piano lessons, Mrs. Hillhouse’s canary always
       singing the most for my talents,
       as if I had thrown some part of my body away upon entering
       her house
       and was now searching every ivory case
       of the keyboard, slipping my fingers over black
       ridges and around smooth rocks,
       wondering where I had lost my bloody organs,
       or my mouth which sometimes opened
       like a California poppy,
       wide and with contrasts
       beautiful in sweeping fields,
       entirely closed morning and night,
I played my way from age to age,
but they all seemed ageless
or perhaps always
old and lonely,
wanting only one thing, surrounded by the dusty bitter-smelling
leaves of orange trees,
wanting only to be touched by a man who loved me,
who would be there every night
to put his large strong hand over my shoulder,
whose hips I would wake up against in the morning,
whose mustaches might brush a face asleep,
dreaming of pianos that made the sound of Mozart
and Schubert without demanding
that life suck everything
out of you each day,
without demanding the emptiness
of a timid little life.
I want to thank my mother
for letting me wake her up sometimes at 6 in the morning
when I practiced my lessons
and for making sure I had a piano
to lay my school books down on, every afternoon.
I haven’t touched the piano in 10 years,
perhaps in fear that what little love I’ve been able to
pick, like lint, out of the corners of pockets,
will get lost,
slide away,
into the terribly empty cavern of me
if I ever open it all the way up again.
Love is a man
with a mustache
gently holding me every night,
always being there when I need to touch him;
he could not know the painfully loud
music from the past that
his loving stops from pounding, banging,
battering through my brain,
which does its best to destroy the precarious gray matter when I
am alone;
he does not hear Mrs. Hillhouse’s canary singing for me,
liking the sound of my lesson this week,
telling me,
confirming what my teacher says,
that I have a gift for the piano
few of her other pupils had.
When I touch the man
I love,
I want to thank my mother for giving me
piano lessons
all those years,
keeping the memory of Beethoven,
a deaf tortured man,
in mind;
            of the beauty that can come
from even an ugly
past.
~~~
Our sweet companions—sharing your bunk and your bed
The versts and the versts and the versts and a hunk of your bread
The wheels' endless round
The rivers, streaming to ground   
The road. . .
Oh the heavenly the Gypsy the early dawn light
Remember the breeze in the morning, the steppe silver-bright
Wisps of blue smoke from the rise
And the song of the wise   
Gypsy czar. . .
In the dark midnight, under the ancient trees' shroud
We gave you sons as perfect as night, sons
As poor as the night
And the nightingale chirred   
Your might. . .
We never stopped you, companions for marvelous hours
Poverty's passions, the impoverished meals we shared
The fierce bonfire's glow
And there, on the carpet below,   
Fell stars. . .
~~~
Ruby, please. A night shift nurse fell asleep at the wheel. The whole earth had a fever and the heated pulse beats faster ’til everything picturesque has her reeling. Just tryna make it real baby, like it is. He condescends. Twitching a trio of flax seeds between the thumb and forefinger in a dirty spiral, these are full of phytoestrogens that turn the gender    ...    generic    ...    generous. Hey, girl! Crease in her hey the size of turning. Is that mean? I live in place where it’s mean to be honest but I come from a place where it’s generous. Freetown is hedged on a slum. The ghetto, everybody’s vigilante. Cut to the footage of a young boy swimming in floodwater made of mud and feces. Constructed. Like shelter, the safest destination the excess has. You see a fugitive, I see my daughter’s future husband, Ma quips, full sunned and sweet, a nigga who can swim, can hunt her free. Glad silk bending his teeth into a Sunday hotel. And the kind of silt that reachers for shatter. All the land is water. You come forth through the cosmic slop by drowning. The sun is a gang of murders. You come through on the new acquittal looking for chicken strips and bourbon with Netflix on in the background and I’ll kill you myself. Back on the Las Vegas strip, the sun is a bouquet of drones chasing promoters through a circus. Stand there and look indignant in a bandana and stop calling the Loa out their names before they answer. You’re on the guest list for lil yachty and one oak and it’s a mouthpiece the boxer’s choking on when the nurse wakes up, a double suicide, American, pie and guns and obscene convenience, proud mascots for an army with no one left to defend
~~~
Think Beyoncé’s “Lemonade”



Belle as beast
Eel as style
Bats testy
Best lastly
Bluely astute — 
as bull
as beetle
as Bey
as butte
Beauty as lute
   thus beauty as lush
Late lethal
Lust salty
She’ll eye
She’ll tally
Yes stately yet stealth
Yes steely yet sly
Hey lathe — 
   [she taut]
Hey sleuth — 
   [she tale]
He heel
He that
She bluesy
She ballsy
She byte
She shall
~~~
Why am I if I am uncertain reasons may inclose.   
Remain remain propose repose chose.   
I call carelessly that the door is open   
Which if they may refuse to open   
No one can rush to close.   
Let them be mine therefor.   
Everybody knows that I chose.   
Therefor if therefore before I close.   
I will therefore offer therefore I offer this.
Which if I refuse to miss may be miss is mine.
I will be well welcome when I come.   
Because I am coming.
Certainly I come having come.
                           These stanzas are done.
~~~
As one in dowte, thys ys my ssayyng:Have I dysplesed yow in any thyng?—Thomas Wyatt



That greasy letter into which my legs entered, its tone conspiratorial as his wink, a linguistic wriggling of the eyebrows, a heh heh—it mayas well have appeared before my door chafing the air with the stiff noise of its cheap leather jacket. Am I not chagrined by his propositionto put it all behind us and begin again as friends? How do I reply? And how shall I contend with the fact, Reader, that this matter cannot mean much to you, and that I, as author, am requiredto consider how to tell this tale in a manner that will entertain you, despite having never met you and having no way of knowing how to affect you, get you to let me touch you all over, kiss your lipsthen tongue your mouth open, move my mouth down your neck to the valley of your chest, pluckbuttons off you with my teeth. I have thought of this for a great, long time. I have sat here hunched, feeling sick; I have paced rugs bare. Why should you care? His door opened, selves spilled out myheart's bucket, flopped their silvers across a floor. He was too poor to enter a store, too poor to pay postage for a letter, so poor he'd have stolen crumbs from a mouse, so poor he'd have sold his cadaver if he could. Yet, consider the man: his deep voice began to work away at my inhibitions like sandpaper. Before I knew it, I'd moved right into him, wiped the eyes of windows clear, mended the tears in his screens, made our bed with sheets so icy clean—but you do not want me to give too much away.What fun would that be? Here, as with any tale, the moral's like a molar, set far back in the mouth of the story. Open wider, let me stick my pliers in, wrench it out. Left unattended, anything's prone to spoil, go bad, turn rotten, sink into itself, stink up the whole house. And how shall I begin to make my account? Dig through the junk heap. Start small. He grew over me calmly as a vine climbs a trellis. Your nightgown is unbecoming. A few small terrorisms.Eyes wide at my wince, incredulous. You thought I'dhit you?
~~~
All winter we sat blind, I next to the girl   who loved her scabs, the blood shields   her head gave up, her face a sun of blank   amazement. She drew. This means love:   a circle with a line through it. More work:   a cross. More crosses. Ice sloughed   through fields. Ice river, the pages   of our notebooks. Outside: limbs and roads   and wires. Outside cracked with force   and turning. Our poems filled with salt.   He took me to his bed.   The writer never speaks. The writer speaks   in details, the sateen lining of my coat,   the star point of tongue kissing. The winter   speaks in the whip. Runoff nixed   with ash. I spilt water on my notebook.   Words went back to ink; paper back   to ruffle, pulp. You smell like dog, the girl   said. You will be left like the winter.   Little sputter in the car’s craw. Little   crevice in the pavement. Ice reminder.   He took me to his bed, saying: Ali,   Ali, tell no one.
~~~
Thinking of Caroline Herschel (1750—1848)
astronomer, sister of William; and others.



A woman in the shape of a monster   
a monster in the shape of a woman   
the skies are full of them
a woman      ‘in the snow
among the Clocks and instruments   
or measuring the ground with poles’
in her 98 years to discover   
8 comets
she whom the moon ruled   
like us
levitating into the night sky   
riding the polished lenses
Galaxies of women, there
doing penance for impetuousness   
ribs chilled   
in those spaces    of the mind
An eye,
          ‘virile, precise and absolutely certain’
          from the mad webs of Uranusborg
                                                            encountering the NOVA   
every impulse of light exploding
from the core
as life flies out of us
             Tycho whispering at last
             ‘Let me not seem to have lived in vain’
What we see, we see   
and seeing is changing
the light that shrivels a mountain   
and leaves a man alive
Heartbeat of the pulsar
heart sweating through my body
The radio impulse   
pouring in from Taurus
         I am bombarded yet         I stand
I have been standing all my life in the   
direct path of a battery of signals
the most accurately transmitted most   
untranslatable language in the universe
I am a galactic cloud so deep      so invo-
luted that a light wave could take 15   
years to travel through me       And has   
taken      I am an instrument in the shape   
of a woman trying to translate pulsations   
into images    for the relief of the body   
and the reconstruction of the mind.
~~~
Purportedly a chain of civilians, soldiers, voices
lice they were called. It is sometimes sufficient to beg
Lice creeping over one, kill them with a chemical;
then there are lice-ghosts everywhere. Glints of pearly
nails. The light of my beloved will keep me from noticing.
Trailer to keep her in; he asked me if I knew her ‘auction name.’
Walked over the scorch; what are values when there’s nothing here?
The wing of a dead soul grows into all the lace you see through,
foreigner, lice-ridden article of divestment. Splendid vices
pouring outcomes over the eager cash flow promotions.
So many of the dead came to me that their transparencies
covered my visage, I’m too near you. Don’t you want to see? 
We came from faraway camps, forsaking the human because it
broke our bodies into pieces for the torturer’s pet, who
propositions you. There is always a slant on it. The trees must 
go down; or light affects your eyes badly. We pleaded for an
adjustment, before we’d recognizably died. You
told me you were a heart, but you were guarding a tower. You
said you were a failure, but you helped destroy us.
Wings all over me, stuck to my skin, there’s no point to it
why are you here when there’s nothing? We just don’t believe it.Now not no never you. I wasn’t you. You have to talk to me
my name is irretrievable. No one letting you go because you
are prized for not existing except as a body, now not.
No I don’t exist, alighting and ghoulishly begging you for a
drop of your blood, a morsel of your flesh. Yes take some of
me, though there are so many others with flesh. But they’re too
rich to give. I know they will never let you in, you beautiful
kids who haunt the corridors extending through
the invisible world, so you can find your way. So you can see
past the smoke of disastrous fear acting out of dreams:
it creeps everywhere. See how it took them over, for
they had no mind to stand against any fantasy the instigators
chose. Had no minds at all. When I was little, no one told
me I’d have to suffer. Who can be a child? And the ghoul
patiently explains how the wing of a word can extend till the
barrier is made, so they can’t see us. If you say beauty, that
will be ignored, and we can hide. It was his name a long time ago,
before the auctions began. Her face then was large and younger.
She can be lice or ghoul. I want that, I don’t want action. But I
will have to live off bits of you.The new definition of witch is one who lets them eat you, if they have to. Because you keep regenerating. Oh that’s such an oldy, and all that flying. Sometimes they do—the man who showed me a few things sits all day. The teaching is to let them come as far as inside you even, empty enough; I can hear them and render affection Why, if there’s nothing? Is this nothing? But you are destroyed We shake all the time. You remind me of someone else I knew. The wing is inscribed, forinvolute. Not to beg in the offering of primal services, we have come here. No one would let us tell anything but our bodily humiliations; had to do differently, not for redemption, because we are more than redemption. I am my maker. The shape formed by the bits of mirror glued on is unimportant. They’re inside my chest and stomach, and they glitter in there. Then if light disattaches, comes up to be spoken, you can see and you can hear. This is true because each of you has this too. Has all the bright pieces inside: there was nothing else left to be. Then I say it, like these pages, or how they would love me for hosting them. The earliest people feared them, and subsequent ones deny the dead. Why would I be afraid of all the people dead and martyred? I thought you were talking about words. You knew I wasn’t.Dido who had to be delivered from the wrong story:I want you to know I’m no longer left over. What about ourlibrary, nothing good left there? I want to read the fashion of when youwere old a long time ago. Gothic roses in the type; I’m an ancientHad read every the book of before they arrested me.I had crossed the black plain, I had held tears it was abruptto be walked in a herd pushing us, wherever we went to be shot, orexecuted in the earlier style. It is a timeless death placed next to themost beat-up books. Only a book can love me now. We’re readingwithout real eyes; I’ve read everything too, or in the tradition oftelling it is repeated within you what we did. We must havebeen trying to make something as we are now, but why. Youhave the ear for it. The light wants you to reply, asking if ashore had been attained or if the language were Dutch or SwahiliI didn’t know. It is how you raised the ground, like raising a childevery word that comes out of my mouth torn I’m responsible toThe wind foul pieces here tries to turn me from tenderness, the waythey killed us in the center of the city, that night. The bodiesfloated in the river while I looked for other souls and saw my facewater damaged a new texture and how can I see? Potentialreturning within its white petals and central whorl.He couldn’t believe someone would hate and betray. Itold him, but he refused to believe it; then I left the room.This lace has to be made. Treason said the ghoul thatpeculiar invention betrayal, how primal was that?In Hesiod after the light, after chaos and lover. Said the armlesswoman, said the one cut open, said the smallpoxedthe strewn children their bodies woven into the pageso I could find what they thought, even if babies only cry.Those are the bodies when I was no longer alive but upliftedbutterfly of lace with an empty length to bifurcate my symmetry.No I don’t believe the lies of the live. I am a spot of light inorder to find out, hanging on because it wasn’t revealed indeath. I know what happened to me, she said; bleeding Ilay there unblessed. Do I want a blessing now, or a god torebuild me? We have gone beyond god or new lives, or death, ortribes. I am working on this lace light at present; I accept thedrop of sacrificial blood to propitiate me. One piece of you at a timeis all I need. I am letting you feed, I say, because I know this hasalways been. You’ve been telling me for yearsWe needed you, if no one else did. We have this project tochange our silence into the beautiful city of a voice.
~~~
                                —Zelda Fitzgerald, 1939



Dear One,
Do you have the time? Can you take
the time? Can you make
the time?
To visit me? The hospital doors have opened to spring,
and its land is high, dear one, each slope
with a vapor of crocuses. Its citizens, alas,
are low. Despondent, in fact, though a jar of sun tea
tans on the sill. The woman beside me
has opened the gift of a china doll, an antique
Frozen Charlotte. Glass face, a cap of china hair,
shellacked to the sheen of a chestnut.
At breakfast the shifting returned, dreadful
within me: colors were infinite, part of the air . . .lines were free of the masses they held. The melon,
a cloud; and the melon, an empty,
oval lariat.
They have moved the canvas chair
from the window. Sun, enhanced
by the brewing jar, threw
an apricot scorch on the fabric. The fruit,
a cloud. The fruit,
a doll-sized, empty lariat.
D. O., into what shape
will our shaplessness flow?
 
   
Dear One,
Italian escapes me. Still, I float to the operas
of Hasse and Handel, a word now and then
lifting through . . .  sole, libertà. In an earlier time,
the thrum-plumped voice of a countertenor—half male,
half female—might place him
among us, we who are thickened
by fracturings. D. O., now and then, my words
break free of the masses they hold.
Think of wind, how it barks through the reeds
of a dog's throat. How the pungent, meaty stream of it
cracks into something like words—but not. I just sit
in the sun room then, slumped in my fur and slabber,
feeling the wolf begin, back away, then some
great-jawed, prehistoric other
begin, back away, then the gill-less,
the gilled, then the first pulsed flecks
begin, back away, until only a wind remains,
vast and seamless. No earth, no heavens.
No rise, no dip. No single flash of syllable
that might be me. Or you.
 
  
D. O.,
Now a gauze of snow on the crocuses! I woke
to its first brilliance—midnight, great moon—
and walked through the hallways. The pin-shaped leaves
of the potted cosmos threw a netted shadow,
and I stopped in its fragile harmony,
my arms, bare feet, the folds of my limp gown
striped by such weightless symmetry
I might have been
myself again. Through an open screen door
I saw a patient, drawn out by the brightness perhaps,
her naked body a ghastly white, her face
a ghastly, frozen white, fixed
in a bow-mouthed syncope, like something
out of time. As we are, D. O., here
in the Highland, time's infinite, cyclic now-and-then
one simple flake of consciousness
against the heated tongue.
 
  
Dear One,
My Italian improves:sole, libertà,
and Dio, of course, D. O.! (Although He
has forsaken me.) The tea at the window
gleams like the flank of a chestnut horse. It darkens
imperceptibly, as madness does, or dusk.
All morning, I held a length of cotton twine—
a shaggy, oakum filament—
between the jar and brewing sun.
We made a budding universe: the solar disc,
the glassy globe of reddish sea, the stillness
in the firmament. At last across the cotton twine
a smoke began, a little ashless burn, Dio,
that flared and died so suddenly
its light has yet to reach me.
~~~
I was eating my dinner alone,
sitting on the living-room couch
watching a movie on TV for company
when the forces your covetous presence prevents
slowly crawled out in fibrous droves.
Without you to follow me with your
clipboard, or record the game my face plays,
masquerading as a cryptic territory
and your field of study, the energy maggots
turned the furniture into an ectoplasmic
mass with the weight of iron: soft but
resistant, a taut balloon against the hand.
Hypnotized by the atmosphere I fell asleep,
and the chair took revenge on my psyche.
I could not scream, so I focused my will
on pushing back against the animate matter.
I was near failing when I managed to utter
the word "dove," and then you shook me awake.
"Stop," stop fighting with the furniture, you said.
Yet something I could not see pushed hard
against me, and it was not a force for good.
My vocal chords were paralyzed and the language
of the living was the only way to stop it.
 
~~~
ONE
The First Invention, ear laid to earth, is listening
to the fingerlength underground beings moving in segments
through tiny tunnels; one inch shrugs out another,
as bamboo climbs in segments, joint by green joint ...
Or an inexpressive mask that must travel
the world, uphill and down, always keeping its own
counsel, impelling  forward from inward—
unspelling a logic that cannot look out or see.
Or a thought that recurs, till one wonders
whether Bach’s theme, without cause, or pause,
is like a cat in a night-closet, the cat evenly leaping
from level to level; the theme that sinks down
into one hand, next leaps to the other, reprises itself,
then doubles down softly, a counterpane on a shelf.
SIX
Have you ever noticed, in Piranesi’s Carcerid’invenzione, the tiny repeating figures in the foreground?
Brittle, frugal, fugal, they ignore that above them
stairways rise out of sight, and somewhere else
collapse, in-swallowed, devolving through walls or domes.
The same way Bach’s motive splays out to the right,
swoons flatly, swans it, footnotes, follows up,
talks to itself, purls, mutters, dawdles, resumes ...
Six is playing at infancy, one three five,
that’s all Baby knows, a block pile clumsily building.
Then the tall chord falls sideways—pretends
it’s a melody—everyone knows it’s a chord—
or a problem in long division which at one point just sticks
on that endless, that déjà vu decimal, six six six ...
ELEVEN
Eleven is caterpillars, two, marching: the one
stave of thick-barred sixteenth notes set down
precisely beneath the other, tiptoe to toetip,
close-clinging, rising and falling and mirrored:
one looks down and locks the other’s horns,
or its own; the two could be said to be linked
like the locked yet endlessly out-spiraling
spindled ribbons of DNA. Yet there’s something
scary, like Cicero’s dizzying concept
of motus animi, hurtling mind unstoppably inventing
figures on figures, yet with no vanishing point,
a world of ladders or stairwells
where space keeps revolving, welling up into space
endless, unfree, unfolding like stairs in a case.
~~~
Her pencil poised, she's ready to create, Then listens to her mind's perverse debate On whether what she does serves any use; And that is all she needs for an excuse To spend all afternoon and half the night Enjoying poems other people write.
~~~
We were dancing—it must have
been a foxtrot or a waltz,
something romantic but
requiring restraint,
rise and fall, precise
execution as we moved
into the next song without
stopping, two chests heaving
above a seven-league
stride—such perfect agony,
one learns to smile through,
ecstatic mimicry
being the sine qua non
of American Smooth.
And because I was distracted
by the effort of
keeping my frame
(the leftward lean, head turned
just enough to gaze out
past your ear and always
smiling, smiling),
I didn’t notice
how still you’d become until
we had done it
(for two measures?
four?)—achieved flight,
that swift and serene
magnificence,
before the earth
remembered who we were
and brought us down. ﻿
~~~
The first person in recorded history
struck by a comet slept on her couch
across the road from the Comet Drive-In
 
and the comet found her roof, her sadness, her knee,
and woke her. Everything that hurts
 
hurt before, she said. Showing at the drive-in, a documentary
on tightrope-walking: a young man frustrated
that his dream, the World Trade Center, was not yet built
 
so he practiced for years in a meadow crossing intended sky, intent
like a pillowcase sweetening him, no harm . . . Here
 
let the towers go, let them write his crossing, cursive, back and forth
 
his name steadying our tongues . . . Famous, overcoat
floating down without him, the idea that we stand
 
where we mean to stand, 1974, a distraction
 
from my parents’ morning commute. At 59th Street they split.
The poems I was writing were no longer poems of their divorce,
 
my father’s sweeping gestures or his pain, the old Volkswagen
and garden hose—all of that had washed from my poems
 
and instead an imaginary family arrived in borrowed gardens,
their son stillborn—even as I grew heavy with my own son
I wrote poem after poem holding this imagined horror close.
~~~
If it takes me all day,
I will get the word freshened out of this poem.
I put it in the first line, then moved it to the second,
and now it won’t come out.
It’s stuck. I’m so frustrated,
so I went out to my little porch all covered in snow
and watched the icicles drip, as I smoked
a cigarette.
Finally I reached up and broke a big, clear spike
off the roof with my bare hand.
And used it to write a word in the snow.
I wrote the word snow.
I can’t stand myself.
~~~
sleeps into heaven with his lamps on, finishing explan-
atory negotiations for a while. Desert the enemy. Star
formations, sandstone understanding, rock time in gen-
eral, whatever. Latching onto ecstasy, words that change
on waking, clover as a syrup of spring mind. Working
off a deficit of sleep or cash, you know who your friends
are. Singled out in traffic, lurching into light, having
lunch. You’re a little one with sand in your eyes, with
green on your horn, with milk on your chin. With flow-
ering ears and hearsay.
 
~~~
1 Sometime after I had enteredthat time of   lifepeople prefer to allude to in othersbut not in themselves, in the middle of the nightthe phone rang. It rang and rangas though the world needed me,though really it was the reverse.I lay in bed, trying to analyzethe ring. It hadmy mother’s persistence and my father’spained embarrassment.When I picked it up, the line was dead.Or was the phone working and the caller dead?Or was it not the phone, but the door perhaps?2 My mother and father stood in the coldon the front steps. My mother stared at me,a daughter, a fellow female.You never think of us, she said.We read your books when they reach heaven.Hardly a mention of us anymore, hardly a mention of  your sister.And they pointed to my dead sister, a complete stranger,tightly wrapped in my mother’s arms.But for us, she said, you wouldn’t exist.And your sister — you have your sister’s soul.After which they vanished, like Mormon missionaries.3 The street was white again,all the bushes covered with heavy snowand the trees glittering, encased with ice.I lay in the dark, waiting for the night to end.It seemed the longest night I had ever known,longer than the night I was born.I write about you all the time, I said aloud.Every time I say “I,” it refers to you.4 Outside the street was silent.The receiver lay on its side among the tangled sheets,its peevish throbbing had ceased some hours before.I left it as it was;its long cord drifting under the furniture.I watched the snow falling,not so much obscuring thingsas making them seem larger than they were.Who would call in the middle of the night?Trouble calls, despair calls.Joy is sleeping like a baby.
~~~
All overgrown by cunning moss,
All interspersed with weed,
The little cage of “Currer Bell”
In quiet “Haworth” laid.
This Bird – observing others
When frosts too sharp became
Retire to other latitudes –
Quietly did the same –
But differed in returning –
Since Yorkshire hills are green –
Yet not in all the nests I meet –
Can Nightingale be seen –
~~~
People can ... read Braille with their lips and their tongue ... 
— David J. Linden, The Kojo Nnamdi Show



Whitman is a foot-long sub
of grass-fed beef,
Falstaff, a fat onion ring,
Ophelia, a wailing wine.
Judas Iscariot’s kiss
turns my lips against themselves.
Emily D makes my tongue
want to fly a kite.
The tongues of angels,
I cannot swallow.
~~~
1. X-Men #141 & 142
2. Defenders #125
3. Phoenix: The Untold Story
4. What if. . .? #31
5. New Mutants #1
6. New Mutants #2
7. Micronauts #58
8. Marvel Universe #5
9. New Mutants #14
10. Secret Wars #1
~~~
Hope fills me this morning as I fashion letters
into a tree that sighs, that stays put yet moves,
reaching to its limits, swaying and settling,
a compass pointing to its place on earth
where every morning it blocks the sun
for me, at work in my studio,
where I scratch and scrawl and loop
letters into shapes so I can enter the Tabernacle
of their bodies and hear each foot, each syllable
sending its roots to a depth as great as that tree’s,
which has been standing and rooting and swaying
long before I came to memorize its plain mystery,
its wide-bodied hull open to stars at night,
each a point that I lengthen into a letter
and each letter into a word, and with the words
build a Tabernacle for the ten most broken
and the ten most resonant words. I will place them
in an inner sanctum enclosed by hanging carpets,
and outside it, another space enclosed by carpets,
and outside it, another, so that those who wish
to read the words, to say them out loud,
must first pull one curtain back and step inside,
and then another, and another until they arrive
in a hushed space, a soundproofed, heavy quiet
where they come to know that which makes all things
                                                                     day after day,
and out of which the earth was made.
Stepping behind each curtain they learn
that the mystery of making is not a secret hidden within
but a series of moves, a sequence of steps,
outlined on a blueprint with notes and call-outs,
white on black, constellations in the night sky,
the primordial living Torah, circulating in the letters
as trees circulate light, capturing it with their leaves,
caching it within the soil, then drawing it back up,
watering the tallest branches with the radiant dark.
~~~
like when I can’t sleep I say to myself
the the the the
the
the
the—
each article drenched to the bone in the
belief it attends something solid,
fond belief, always being
cut in on—the
the
the
the the the the the the
does the trick if I can stick with it
not get swept into narrative, that shock brigade
all tell, if by shock they mean hit
the the the the the the the the
papers say asylum is temporary
now, true, what’s not that’s able to
maintain its potency, you wake up
from a spell in that genre of safety, relative
safety, what saved you
making as if the story were widely shared
until you saw them as-if otherwise and then
what saved you was seeing their look, saying
resemblance too may be at any time revoked so
must be made the most
of,
seeing it then, seizing
the minute dismounting with the foot
trained as a dancer to keep you traveling because
they’d slept and, refreshed, moved the the the the
papers expired, it’s their turn now
to really live
~~~
I. Separation Precedes Meeting
The cat so close
to the fire
I smell scorched
breath. Parents,
silent, behind me,
a feeling of
trees that might fall.
Or dogs.
                 A poem,
like trying
to remember,
is a movement
of the whole body.
You follow the
fog
into more fog.
Maybe the door ahead
divides
the facts
from natural affection. How
can I know. I meet
too many
in every mirror.
 
 
 2.
 
When I was little,
was I I?
My sister? A wolf
chained,
smothered in green virtues?
                                              Slower
time
of memory. Once
I’ve got something
I lie
down on it
with my whole body.
Goethe quotations, warm
sand, a smell of hay,
long afternoons.
                            But it
would take a road
would turn, with space,
in on itself,
would turn
occasion into offer.
 
 
 
 
 3.
 
For days I hold
a tiny landscape between
thumb
and index:
sand,
heather,
shimmer of blue between pines.
No smell: matchbook.
Sand as schematic as
                                    Falling
into memory,
down,
with my blood,
to the accretions
in the arteries,
to be read with the whole
body, in the chambers
of the heart.
The light: of the match,
struck,
at last.
 
 
 
 
 
    4.
 
Concentration: a frown
of the whole body. I can’t
remember. Too many
pasts
recede
in all directions.
Slow movement into
                                   Distant boots.
Black beetles at night. A smell
of sweat.
                 The restaurant,
yes. You’ve no idea
how much my father used to eat.
Place thick with smoke.
Cards. Beer foaming over
on the table.
                     And always
some guy said I ought
to get married,
put a pillow behind my eyes
and, with a knowing
sigh, spat
in my lap.
 
 
 
 
 
 5.
 
The present.
As difficult as
the past, once a place
curves into
           Hips swinging elsewhere.
Castles in sand.
Or Spain. Space
of another language.
                                   Sleep
is a body of water.
You follow your lips
into its softness. Far down
the head finds its level
    
 
 
 
 
 6. Tropisms
 
Inward, always. Night
curls the clover leaf
around its sleep.
Tightly.
The bodies of the just
roll,
all night,
through subterranean caves
which turn
in on themselves.
                                Long
tunnel
of forgetting. Need
of blur. The air,
large, curves
its whole body.
Big hammering waves
flatten my
muscles.
Inward, the distances: male
and female fields,
rigorously equal.
    
 
 
 
 
 
 7.
 
The drunk fell toward me
in the street. I hope
he wasn’t
disappointed. Skinned
his sleep.
                 November.
 
And a smell of snow. Quite normal,
says the landlord, the master
of rubbish, smaller
and smaller in my
curved mirror.
                         I have un-
controllable
good luck: my sleep
always turns dense
and visible. There
are many witches
in Germany. Their songs
descend in steady half-tones
through you.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.
 
You’ll die, Novalis says, you’ll die
following endless rows
of sheep into your
even breath.
                     Precarious,
like Mozart, a living
kind of air,
keeps the dream
spinning
around itself, its
missing core.
Image
after image of pleasure
of the whole body
deepens
my sleep:
 
fins.
 
 
 
 
 
 
    9. Introducing Decimals
 
A dream, like trying
to remember, breaks open words
for other,
hidden meanings. The grass
pales by degrees, twigs
quaver glassily,
ice
flowers the window.
Intimate equations more complicated
than the coordinates of past
and Germany. The cat
can’t lift its paw,
its leg longer and longer
with effort.
A crying fit
is cancelled. An aria jelled
in the larynx.
Nothing moves in the cotton
coma: only Descartes
pinches himself
an every fraction
must be solved.
 
 
~~~
When Americans say a man
takes liberties, they mean
he’s gone too far. In Philadelphia today I saw
a kid on a leash look mom-ward
and announce his fondest wish: one
bicentennial burger, hold
the relish. Hold is forget,
in American.
On the courts of Philadelphia
the rich prepare
to serve, to fault. The language is a game as well,
in which love can mean nothing,
doubletalk mean lie. I’m saying
doubletalk with me. I’m saying
go so far the customs are untold.
Make nothing without words,
and let me be
the one you never hold.
~~~
Champollion fainted, she says, once he had wrested their secret from the hieroglyphs and saw them turn transparent. The serpent no longer with power to strike, but biting its tail. I smell my salts, my packets of words, panicked. I’m no longer sure whether they shape my reality or have too little mass to interact with naked matter. Then they would pass right through the earth as I will in death.
The lightest particles gather the energy, he says, and given their density, outweigh stars. Thought follows thought, the interval calibrated on the space between your legs. Your yes fire, your no the crack of a whip. Well, more a filament breaking in a lightbulb. Eating from the Tree of Knowledge can’t be undone. Only muddied, as by motivation. And the way you thrust out your belly as you walk, with almost shameless indifference, makes a void in the air, but no case for cosmic deceleration.
 
So even if I despair of plane surfaces, she says, writing, even talking, becomes an act of faith that my bondage to grammar and lexicon is not in vain. That these symbols in their beautiful and hallucinatory nudity blind me only to make me see. There is fire under the smoke. The sun also rises and falls.
We still read at risk, he says, but we don’t need to lard the crocodile with arrows. The picture won’t devour us. It is swallowed in the fluid agreements between gonads and frontal lobe at a rate relative to the dark closing in. Yet two speeds in paroxysm need not mesh. A burning heart, failing to strike while hot, may not save the burning feet.
~~~
The capital city. Arrowroot. Water-bur. Colts. Hail. Bamboo grass. The round-leaved violet. Club moss. Water oats. Flat river-boats. The mandarin duck.
                        —The Pillow Book of Sei Shōnagon



The sky. And the sky above that. The exchange of ice between mouths. Other people's
poems
My friend says we never write about anything we can get to the bottom of. For him, this
is a place arbored with locust trees. For me, it's a language for which I haven't quite
found the language yet.
The dewy smell of a new-cut pear. Bacon chowder flecked with thyme. Roasted duck
skin ashine with plum jam. Scorpion peppers.
Clothes on a line. A smell of rain battering the rosemary bush. The Book Cliffs. Most
forms of banditry. Weathered barns. Dr. Peebles. The Woman's Tonic, it says on the
side, in old white paint.
The clink of someone putting away dishes in another room.
The mechanical bull at the cowboy bar in West Salt Lake. The girls ride it wearing just
bikinis and cowboy hats. I lean over to my friend and say, I would worry about
catching something. And he leans back to say, That's really the thing you'd worry
about? We knock the bottom of our bottles together.
How they talk in old movies, like, Now listen here. Just because you can swing a bat
doesn't mean you can play ball. Or, I'll be your hot cross if you'll be my bun. Well,
anyway, you know what I mean.
Somewhere between the sayable and the unsayable, poetry runs. Antidote to the river
of forgetting.
Like a rosary hung from a certain rearview mirror. Like the infinite rasp of gravel
under the wheel of a departing car. 
Gerard Manley Hopkins's last words were I'm so happy, I'm so happy. Oscar Wilde
took one look at the crackling wallpaper in his Paris flat, then at his friends gathered
around and said, One or the other of us has got to go. Wittgenstein said simply, Tell all
my friends, I've had a wonderful life.
 
~~~
I really fucked up. My E-flat key was loose. I only got a few hours of sleep the night before because Robyn and I were on the phone. They gave me the wrong repertoire list. How was I to know that high altitude affects clarinet reeds? I ran out of beta blockers. I forgot to bring a water bottle. I was worried that they’d hire that asshole who they don’t like because he threatened to blackball them at the union meeting. The acoustics were terrible. The second violinist used a new rosin and that threw her off, which unnerved me. My tinnitus roared the whole time. Robyn auditioned right before me. Just as I blew the first note, it dawned on me that Robyn might be sleeping with the conductor. Someone backstage slammed a door and I had to start all over again. The concertmaster doesn’t know a trumpet from a trombone, but since he’s powerful in a certain tiny corner of the music world everyone feels forced to curry favor with him. I forgot to eat. The audition committee talked the whole time. A clang in the heating system was near deafening. My carpal tunnel flared up. My neck twinges flared up. My arthritis flared up. I only got a few hours of sleep. I would have won the last competition, except that the concertmaster’s student was appointed with no audition, so I kept wondering if the same thing would happen again. I forgot I wasn’t playing the flute. I only got a few hours of sleep because Robyn and I were on the phone all night and decided to end our marriage. I really fucked up.
~~~
I walk the purple carpet into your eye
carrying the silver butter server
but a truck rumbles by,
                      leaving its black tire prints on my foot
and old images          the sound of banging screen doors on hot
             afternoons and a fly buzzing over the Kool-Aid spilled on
             the sink
flicker, as reflections on the metal surface.
Come in, you said,
inside your paintings, inside the blood factory, inside the
old songs that line your hands, inside
eyes that change like a snowflake every second,
inside spinach leaves holding that one piece of gravel,
inside the whiskers of a cat,
inside your old hat, and most of all inside your mouth where you
grind the pigments with your teeth, painting
with a broken bottle on the floor, and painting
with an ostrich feather on the moon that rolls out of my mouth.
You cannot let me walk inside you too long inside
the veins where my small feet touch
bottom.
You must reach inside and pull me
like a silver bullet
from your arm.
~~~
My voice, not being proud
Like a strong woman’s, that cries
Imperiously aloud
That death disarm her, lull her—
Screams for no mourning color
Laid menacingly, like fire,
Over my long desire.
It will end, and leave no print.
As you lie, I shall lie:
Separate, eased, and cured.
Whatever is wasted or wanted
In this country of glass and flint
Some garden will use, once planted.
As you lie alone, I shall lie,
O, in singleness assured,
Deafened by mire and lime.
I remember, while there is time.
 
 
~~~
Blushing in a manner out of keeping with my age(my graying hair, my falling face)I entered Greyfriar’s Inn.I was blushing, and out of keeping with my age.In I went, making my foolish entrance,folding down my umbrella self-consciously — aware of the locals at the bar with their ginand their small talk — and walked right up to the barmaid,somewhat brazenly, I thought. One glass of beer,I said to her, and she, smiling kindly,pulled it. I stood and waited.I waited for them all to stop their fond,drunken reminiscences,for them to stop putting forth their opinions,and to turn to me and say — in an accusatory way — What are you doing here? On a Wednesday night?Unaccompanied?With an accent we can’t quite identify?I waited ready:Why am I here? I would say.I am here as an imposter, an outsider,a reluctant admirer of your lovely daughter Jane — I am here for my Lecture in the Picturesque,to learn of sidescreens and perspectives,to learn of window tax and syntax — and “ha-has” — for harmless gambling in the parlor,wearing mittens and handworked collars and a pretty amber cross — I am here to steal a pistol and a spoon found underground,to rob the peacock feathers streaming from the silly boy’s crown — I am here, I would say, for sensation — For sensation? they would say, and I would say:Yes! Painful sensation of restraint or alarm!Oh ye patrons of Greyfriar’s Inn, I would exclaim,I am here to meet your high-waisted Jane,to embrace her as my comrade; as my brother-in-arms!I stood and waited. But the good patrons of Greyfriar’s Inn,they never said a thing; just continued talking amongst themselves,quietly reminiscing. I paid the barmaid and turned my head.I looked out at the wet; I looked out at the southwest rain,and the redbrick houses. I watched the famous silhouette,gently swinging back and forth above the gate.I raised the glass to her impassive, sideways face.Nothing ventured. Nothing gained.
~~~
after Richard Wilbur



The opposite of walk?
      A psychic with a crystal ball
            and tarot deck
                        who sees green
                                    when your palm is read.
      At the sign of a red palm
             I don’t walk,
                         I run.
~~~
     for Robert Payne



Great Alexander sailing was from his true course turned
By a young wind from a cloud in Asia moving
Like a most recognizable most silvery woman;
Tall Alexander to the island came.
The small breeze blew behind his turning head.
He walked the foam of ripples into this scene.
 
The trunk of the speaking tree looks like a tree-trunk
Until you look again.     Then people and animals
Are ripening on the branches;     the broad leaves
Are leaves;     pale horses, sharp fine foxes
Blossom;     the red rabbit falls
Ready and running.     The trunk coils, turns,
Snakes, fishes.     Now the ripe people fall and run,
Three of them in their shore-dance, flames that stand
Where reeds are creatures and the foam is flame.
 
Stiff Alexander stands.     He cannot turn.
But he is free to turn : this is the speaking tree,
It calls your name.     It tells us what we mean.
~~~
 
                           There’s a shadow over the city               the light, as usual, framing and erasing
 
Just say you
dream fires each
night smoothing each
collapsing page from
 
the throat talking
in a series
of measures in
the high desert
 
the perfect life
in a series
of measured gestures
an invitation to
 
see the world
from a bridge
that burns in
the next night
~~~
. . . some days ago I saw the picture of an Angel who, in making the Annunciation, seemed to be trying to chase Mary out of her room with movements showing the sort of attack one might make on some hated enemy; and Mary, as if desperate, seemed to be trying to throw herself out of the window. Do not fall into errors like these.  

                                                                                                — Leonardo da Vinci



It is time to speak of the lies
            of images, omissions, insertions—             imitations of reality,                         but whose reality, Leonardo? 
     For you she’s in nature— 
                 you’ve lavished so much attention
                                      on rock formations along your raised horizon
                 varieties of grass in the lawn
                 cloud convocations 
                          and the shadow the archangel casts
            obliterating most of what’s imagined growing there 
                        and she, lovely, composed—“great grace of shadows and of lights is added
to the faces of those who sit” beside the darkness of brown plasterwork—her right arm
almost deformed, too far forward, 
                        reaching out at an impossible angle—
 
                                                FOR WHAT
 —Botticelli, Campin, van Eyck—for you
 
she’s indoors all decked out in luscious silk and satin,
surrounded by finery—tied-back drapery, carved benches,
a rug or tiled floor, loggias
and archways beyond her wildest ken
windows revealing hortus conclusi and winding paths
              slogging toward the sea
And what of all those blues and golds, so rife with wealth
 
            in her life there’s only red from madder juice
            and yellow from kaolin clay
                        and a linen shift all frayed
 
The truth also is a small opening high up on the wall
A floor that’s hard-packed dirt
And beyond the room, villagers working the fields,
donkeys dragging threshing boards over newly harvested wheat
 
            AND EVERYWHERE, INSIDE AND OUT, WORLD-MOTHETING DUST
 
                                         For all of you
this is an event reduced to a book she cannot read
a lily she does not smell
a lectern she never owned
 
She might as well comb her hair with a stiletto heel
Make of her body a cloud of white tulle
Carry a watering can and wear shapely wooden clogs
Fake glamour in a black bare-back gown
Crouch on the ground flipping coins
Pop a pogo stick between her legs and levitate
 
                          SHE COULD BE ANYONE            ANYWHERE             ANYTIME
 
 
She could be sitting in her slip, bored,
bored to death, the intercom
image appearing out of nowhere,
announcing a stranger
 
            (prima materia, take a deep breath
 
            (for divinity to enter the world,
                        your mystery must be experienced
 
Her eyes will go wide, not expecting this
 
Her ears have encountered only silence
 
            and the soft moan of a dove
                        (OOOOOOOOOOOOOOO
 
The trees thin
The cumulus sky crackles ever so quietly
Somewhere a rainbow breaks
 
            too loud now
                        too strident
 
                        He’s gotten in
 
Hail comes in pellets
            (heavy hitters
 
            She will be patient
            and hear him out
                        though what she really wants is to get back under the covers
                        that are damask, but a lie—
                                    (rough-hewn flax is what she’d have)
 
Or she could be blending a batch of myrrh
and roses to deodorize the foul
stench of the room that opens out
not on a vista of budding poplars
but on sewage,
piles of it
come to rot at the side of the road
just there, in front of her door
            where broken planks of wood lean
            and bleating sheep wait to be herded up the hill
 
But here’s this guy breezing in
 
                             (Titan, El Greco paint his feet unplanted on the ground
                                         (is he preparing for a quick getaway
                                                     or must he be higher on the picture plane
                             (Tintoretto catches him in mid-flight, a show-off, he
                             (Martini and Crivelli force him to his knees
 
The breeze may be the whisper of something
              she is in danger of losing
 
                             (the breeze may be her destiny
 
 
or his feathers could begin to moult
                             (transaction of feathers,
                             (light as a feather
                                                in the face of all that dust she can’t escape
 
or she could cringe at wings,
                                  voracious, unfurled,
trying to scoop her up, knock her down,
drown her in their soft pile,
 
snuff out any NO she stashes in her mind,
or the wind could whip his feathers
and blow the townsfolk quickly to her side
 
          (Today, she knows no one will arrive in time . . . )
 
          Certainly not those people tending their gardens,
                      (as if anyone had topiary trees
                               as Rogier van der Weyden (possibly Memling) shows
 
                                                (read fields of barley and wheat
                                                              and plows, plenty of plows
 
In his eyes, pools of light map no pollution, only flame
In hers, no flecks, no threads mar the cobalt calm
 
            until his hail scumbles their surface
 
            What is she to make of it
 
Her lids lower
 
Chrysalises, her eyes close on their private dusk
                        (she’s already seen her share of Roman crucifixions
 
            (perhaps the future is there and her eyes seek the great above
                             where son and mother will be united
            (perhaps she conjugates the months—
                                              (nine is real—
                                  (a number done on her
 
            (perhaps she dabbles with using rue to end the thing
 
                                              SHE’S GOT A CHOICE AFTER ALL
 
 
For the child she will have boundless love
 
For posterity the memory of being
 
For her life no proper translation
~~~
Dinner finished, wine in hand, in a vaguely competitive spirit
of disclosure, we trail Google Earth's invisible pervert
through the streets of our hometowns, but find them shabbier,
     or grossly
 
contemporized, denuded of childhood's native flora,
stuccoed or in some other way hostile
to the historical reenactments we expect of our former
 
settings. What sadness in the disused curling rinks, their illegal
basement bars imploding, in the seed of a Walmart
sprouting in the demographic, in Street View's perpetual noon.
     With pale
 
and bloated production values, hits of AM radio rise
to the surface of a network of social relations long obsolete.
     We sense
a loss of rapport. But how sweet the persistence
 
of angle parking! Would we burn these places rather than see
     them
change, or just happily burn them, the sites of wreckage
from which we staggered with our formative injuries into the rest
 
of our lives. They cannot be consigned to the fourfold,
though the age we were belongs to someone else. Like our old
house. Look what they've done to it. Who thought this would
     be fun?
 
A concert, then, YouTube from those inconceivable days before
YouTube, an era boarded over like a bankrupt country store,
cans still on its shelves, so hastily did we leave it. How beautiful
 
they are in their poncey clothes, their youthful higher
registers, fullscreen, two of them dead now. Is this eternity?
Encore, applause, encore; it's almost like being there.
~~~
In flat America, in Chicago,
Graceland cemetery on the German North Side.
Forty feet of Corinthian candle
celebrate Pullman embedded
lonely raisin in a cake of concrete.
The Potter Palmers float
in an island parthenon.
Barons of hogfat, railroads and wheat
are postmarked with angels and lambs.
But the Getty tomb: white, snow patterned
in a triangle of trees swims dappled with leaf shadow,
sketched light arch within arch
delicate as fingernail moons.
The green doors should not be locked.
Doors of fern and flower should not be shut.
Louis Sullivan, I sit on your grave.It is not now good weather for prophets.
Sun eddies on the steelsmoke air like sinking honey.
On the inner green door of the Getty tomb
(a thighbone's throw from your stone)
a marvel of growing, blooming, thrusting into seed:
how all living wreathe and insinuate
in the circlet of repetition that never repeats:ever new birth never rebirth.
Each tide pool microcosm spiraling from your hand.
Sullivan, you had another five years
when your society would give you work.
Thirty years with want crackling in your hands.
Thirty after years with cities
flowering and turning grey in your beard.
All poets are unemployed nowadays.
My country marches in its sleep.
The past structures a heavy mausoleum
hiding its iron frame in masonry.
Men burn like grass
while armies grow.
Thirty years in the vast rumbling gut
of this society you stormed
to be used, screamed
no louder than any other breaking voice.
The waste of a good man
bleeds the future that's come
in Chicago, in flat America,
where the poor still bleed from the teeth,
housed in sewers and filing cabinets,
where prophets may spit into the wind
till anger sleets their eyes shut,
where this house that dances the seasons
and the braid of all living
and the joy of a man making his new good thing
is strange, irrelevant as a meteor,
in Chicago, in flat America
in this year of our burning.
~~~
You want to touch big animals,animals not touched by your peersWoe is not youYou have the polar bear in FranzJosef Land, the white whale in the Seaof Okhotsk,You have the brown bear, leopard& Amur tiger in Ussuri, the FarEast, so east, like a talonit hooks Heilongjiang, claimsthat edge of Pacific, that swath ofmaritime lands & a maritime state — Primorsky Krai, hometo Vladivostok, the ancient Manchurianforest, its corresponding duck,a short North Korean river-border changing course, redrawnwhen the bank sloughs off,its markers slipping, washingaway — Tumen, sputteringinto the Sea of JapanThere is an awareness of islands — Oshima, Okushiri, Hokkaido — tucked into the brain of every organismVolcanics, large to small,they perforate the waters northeastto Kamchatka (& that is so faryour countrymen sendtheir misbehaved childrento so-called corners in their houses) Perhaps you can standon that shore facing inland & gazeout over the spray of those white whales of yours, the expansethat comprises your jurisdiction Now, what’s the first thing you knowis there, but can’t see for mist, et al:Khabarovsk Krai, whose coat of armsis a bear holding a coat of armsof a bear & a tiger holdinga blue & yellow coat of arms,inverted Y, tiny crown afloat, big bearpinching his canoe-shaped tonguebetween his teeth — & what tumbles from there butBlack Dragon, scrawling from InnerMongolia to Tartar Strait, true,for all its bordermaking, to its roots From it & all its names, names for everything: for islands, for fables,the provinces it traces, forgruesome late-Mongol conquerors& the surrounding biologyYou think about itnow & again, thumbinga leatherbound natural history,gift from a pandering South American delegation ripewith stories about their jaguar, the earlyexplorers who called it tigreIn the world, there are 9 subspeciesof tiger, all eastern, 3 of them extinctAmur is classified as merely endangered& concentrated in Ussuri StateNature Reserve, where you are knownbecause you shot oneIt is somewhat a farceThere is no state — not since Bolshevikword set foot there — only a riverbearing the name & youcommissioned the research: to study everyonewith a name on the Red Listof Threatened Species, to housedata online at programmes.putin.kremlin.ru,to visit them all & each visitto carry an air gun & a satchelof tranquilizer darts, to shoot, to topple,to affix the GPS collar, to caressthe fur (in the case of the whalethe skin) & muse to scientists about the big, sleepy oaf:Would she remember, or eat you, or both?
~~~
If by real you mean as real as a shark tooth stuck
in your heel, the wetness of a finished lollipop stick,
the surprise of a thumbtack in your purse—
then Yes, every last page is true, every nuance,
bit, and bite. Wait. I have made them up—all of them—
and when I say I am married, it means I marriedall of them, a whole neighborhood of past loves.
Can you imagine the number of bouquets, how many
slices of cake? Even now, my husbands plan a great meal
for us—one chops up some parsley, one stirs a bubbling pot
on the stove. One changes the baby, and one sleeps
in a fat chair. One flips through the newspaper, another
whistles while he shaves in the shower, and every single
one of them wonders what time I am coming home.
~~~
Anatomie des parties de la génération, Paris, 1773



What have they done to deserve this beauty?
Did they, like Marsyas, invite some knife-
wielding god with petty transgressions,
the crime of a few tunes on Athena’s lost flute?
 
Or were they simply too poor for deep
graves, locked gates, and good husbands
to watch over the mounds of new soil
tossed toward them and their hunted unborn?
 
Whoever they were, they’re still with us,
posing demurely in suits of blood
and muscle, the bruised shadows
of what skin they do have, purpling like
 
crushed petunias as they spread their legs
and raise their meaty arms to show
dissected breasts, unfinished infants, sundry
viscera on the ground about their feet
 
as if this were Thanksgiving and they
cornucopias stuffed with squash and fruit.
And who delivered their sentences?
Surely not the muses who, at least,
 
let them keep rococo faces. In 1773
the womb and the brain were the last outposts
of the body to be mapped. D’Agoty bought
the rights to Le Blon’s technique of printing
 
mezzotints and gave these ladies homes
in scientific texts, but anatomists believed
D’Agoty’s prints too gorgeous to be accurate.
Perhaps that’s why they open other wounds
 
so easily in us. All so like the single rabbit
I downed at twenty with a borrowed rifle,
and then was obligated to see skinned,
first scoring the length of the spine,
 
then peeling the fur in one steaming piece,
while the perverse uncle who clearly desired
to touch me, instead held up a dripping pelt
in one hand, and in the other, a flayed carcass
 
still wrapped in its bundle of muscle like a gift.
~~~
Bargain tarts, raspberry, goose,
he said, don't write about that
surgery, women who have hacked off write
all parts and natures of women
who lose food in the bottom parts
of refrigerators, onions, scallions,
sour tomatoes, tiny cocktail weenies
lost in the airless dark write
When you give over your breast
to cancer, for God's sake don't
write about it.
Write about silliness, holding hands
in sandboxes, small girls playing fudge-
and-find-me-alley-tag at dusk, Rochester,
state of pubescent, New Yorka roonie.
...day I learned to drive aimed car
at horizon and floored it. Got there.
God in color, no cable, firsthand.
Going and coming back I thought I'd live.
Not much for visions, still at sink soaking
pinkies in sweetalmond suds, I heard Mom.
Come on home, she said. Scared the witless bejeebies
out of me. Next day I opted for surgery.
Cut that mama off and saved my life.
Big daddy surgeon said right on the mark, sweet honey.
It was done.
He's got a girlfriend works at his office, don't you know,
she thinks he's licorice stick swinger. I caught them
hugging in the mimeo room. Ain't nothing to it, he said,
rolling his cup of a palm over the scar. Mmmmmm-mmmmm,
this hillock is a sweet raisin, roll over baby, pour me out.
Okeydokey.
What came next in the woods, woolly dark trees
don't give a fudge if what's hugging them hard
dents in two places. I hang on for dear life.
Filled pockets with seedpods, got bulbs
I shoehorned into clay pots for life's sake.
Nevertheless the disc shone hard, or didn't.
~~~
I held a jackhammer once.
It matched me
 
in height and weight and I
planned destruction, ripped
 
everything solid from the ground.
The concrete was my prey,
 
but it was the tool I fought
to master, its metal body
 
trembling beneath my hands.
Or, perhaps, its electric heart
 
was what shook me through
my last held bones.
 
The concrete, gone,
the rented machinery, returned—
 
and I wondered if Sisyphus had imagined
a garden where the rock came from.
~~~
The whole trick of this thing    ...    is to get out of your own light.                       — Marianne Faithfull



She said she sang very close to the miketo change the space. And I changed the spaceby striding down the Boulevard Raspail at dusk in tight jeansuntil an Algerian engineer plucked the pen from my back pocket.As if you’re inside my head and you’re hearing the song from in there.He came from the desert, I camefrom green suburbs. We understoodnothing of one another over glasses of metallic red wine.I was playing Girl. He playedMan. Several plots were afoot, allmisfiring. One had to do with my skimpy black shirtand light hair, his broad shoulders and hungerafter months on an oil rig. Anotherwas untranslatable. Apollinaireburned his fingers on June’s smoldering lyrebut I had lost my pen. The engineerread only construction manuals. His roomwas dim and narrow and no,the story didn’t slide that way though there are many waysto throw oneself away.One singer did it by living by a broken walluntil she shredded her voice but still she offered each song,she said, like an Appalachian artifact.Like trash along the riverbank chafing at the quayplastic bottles a torn shirt fractured dollsthrough which the current chortles an intimate tune.
~~~
On some fundless expedition, you discover it beneath a pyracantha bush carved from the hip bone of a long-extinct herbivore that walked the plains on legs a story tall. An ocarina of bone drilled and shaped laboriously with tools too soft to be efficient by one primitive musician spending night after night squatting by the fire. No instrument of percussion: place this against your lips, fill it from your lungs to sound a note winding double helix, solo and thready calling to the pack.
~~~
My husband's out-of-town so I set
Our house on fire. Champagne
And eggs, asparagus for breakfast.
Water for lunch. I eat dinner early
In the late afternoon while the wind
Disorganizes leaves, leaving me
To clean them up. I think that the
Imagination's guided by logic—
A hand that's used to translating
Images of rain to snow. Error-filled,
The night destroys the details of
Poems—the pearls worn by Beethoven
In secret, the rocks H.D. mistook
For seaweed as she walked
In exaltation toward the beach. Is it
Possible to sing the imagination
Into being? And is it possible for us
To valorize autumn by cloaking in
Difficult language the paths of stars?
Geraniums, they make entr'actes
Out of air as I walk past them.
Always these goddamn leaves
And acorns shat on our house by
The goddamn oak. One of us will fail
The other, will plagiarize language
From the other, that's certain.
Acorns are beautiful only to those
Who've never had to clean them up.
~~~
Long after I stopped participating
Those images pursued me
I found myself turning from them
Even in the small light before dawn
To meet the face of my own body
Still taut and strong, almost too
Strong a house for so much shame
Not mine alone but also yours
And my brother’s, lots of people’s,
I know it was irrational, for whom I saw
Myself responsible and to whom
I wished to remain hospitable.
We had all been pursuing our own
Disintegration for so long by then
That by the time the other side
Began to raise a more coherent
Complaint against us we devolved
With such ease and swiftness it seemed
To alarm even our enemies. By then
Many of us had succumbed to quivering
Idiocy while others drew vitality from new
Careers as public scolds. Behind these
Middle-management professors were at pains
To display their faultless views lest they too
Find censure, infamy, unemployment and death
At the hands of an enraged public
Individuals in such pain and torment
And such confusion hardly anyone dared
Ask more of them than that they not shoot
And in fact many of us willed them to shoot
And some of us were the shooters
And shoot we did, and got us square
In the heart and in the face, which anyway
We had been preparing these long years
For bullets and explosions and whatever
Else. A vast unpaid army
Of self-destructors, false comrades, impotent
Brainiacs who wished to appear to be kind
Everything we did for our government
And the corporations that served it we did for free
In exchange for the privilege of watching one
Another break down. Sometimes we were the ones
Doing the breaking. We would comfort one another
Afterward, congratulating each other on the fortitude
It took to display such vulnerability. The demonstration
Of an infirmity followed by a self-justificatory recuperation
Of our own means and our own ends, in short, of ourselves
And our respect for ourselves—this amounted to the dominant
Rhetoric of the age, which some called sharing, which partook
Of modes of oratory and of polemic, of intimate
Journals and of statements from on high issued by public
Figures, whom at one time or another we all mistook ourselves for.
Anyway it wasn’t working. None of it was working.
Not our ostentation and not the uses we put our suffering
To, the guilt- and schadenfreude-based attention
We extracted from our friends and followers, and even the passing
Sensation of true sincerity, of actual truth, quickly emulsified
Into the great and the terrible metastasizing whole.
To the point it began to seem wisest to publish only
Within the confines of our own flesh, but our interiors
Had their biometrics too, and were functions not only
Of stardust, the universe as we now were prone to addressing
The godhead, but also of every mean and median of the selfsame
Vicious culture that drove us to retreat into the jail of our own bones
And the cramped confines of our swollen veins and ducts in the first place
Our skin was the same wall they talked about on the news
And our hearts were the bombs whose threat never withdrew
Images could drop from above like the pendulum in “The Pit
And the Pendulum” or killer drones to shatter the face of our lover
Into contemporaneous pasts, futures, celebrities, and other
Lovers all of whom our attention paid equally in confusion
And longing, and a fleeting sense like passing ghosts
Of a barely-remarked-upon catastrophe that was over
Both before and after it was too late. We were ancient
Creatures, built for love and war. Everything said so
And we could not face how abstract it was all becoming
Because it was also all the opposite of abstract, it was
Our flesh, our mother’s bloodied forehead
On the floor of Penn Station, and wherever we hid
Our face, amid a crowd of stars for example as Yeats
Once put it, and for stars insert celebrities
Or astrology here, your choice, and even when
We closed our eyes, all this was all we looked at
Every day all day. It was all we could see.
We were lost in a language of images.
It was growing difficult to speak. Yet talk
Was everywhere. Some of us still sought
To dominate one another intellectually
Others physically; still others psychically or some
Of all of the above, everything seeming to congeal
Into bad versions of sports by other means
And sports by that time was the only metaphor
Left that could acceptably be applied to anything.
The images gave us no rest yet failed over
And over despite the immensity
Of their realism to describe the world as we really
Knew it, and worse, as it knew us
~~~
I’ve always felt as if I were in a cage.
If I stick out an arm, I’m seen as wanting
and taking. A leg: my violence is noted.
When I mentioned the suffocation by
my father, they made it autobiographical.
The subtext of my work in iron has been
ignored, lost in discussions of time, not space.
What you’ll never understand about
installations is that everyone else is always
outside of them. I’m stuck inside. The move
toward deliberate transience is the mark of a fool.
If disappearing is inevitable, you must fight it.
No one misses the prisoner.
The bars are like a frame: you want in
as much as I have always wanted out.
~~~
Much Madness is divinest Sense -
To a discerning Eye -
Much Sense - the starkest Madness -
’Tis the Majority
In this, as all, prevail -
Assent - and you are sane -
Demur - you’re straightway dangerous -
And handled with a Chain -
~~~
In Jinotega women greeted us
with thousands of flowers roses
it was hard to tell the petals
on our faces and arms falling
then embraces and the Spanish language
which is a little like a descent of
petals pink and orange
Suddenly out of the hallway our
gathering place AMNLAE the
Asociación de Mujeres women
came running seat yourselves dear
guests from the north we announce
a play a dance a play the women
their faces mountain river Indian
European Spanish dark-haired
women
dance in gray-green
fatigues they dance the Contra who
circles the village waiting
for the young teacher the health worker
(these are the strategies) the farmer
in the high village walks out into the
morning toward the front which is a
circle of terror
they dance
the work of women and men they dance
the plowing of the fields they kneel
to the harrowing with the machetes they
dance the sowing of seed (which is always
a dance) and the ripening of corn the
flowers of grain they dance the harvest
they raise their machetes for
the harvest the machetes are high
but no!
out of the hallway in green and gray
come those who dance the stealth
of the Contra cruelly they
dance the ambush the slaughter of
the farmer they are the death dancers
who found the schoolteacher they caught
the boy who dancing brought seeds in
his hat all the way from Matagalpa they
dance the death of the mother the
father the rape of the daughter they
dance the child murdered the seeds
spilled and trampled they dance
sorrow sorrow
they dance the
search for the Contra and the defeat
they dance a comic dance they make a
joke of the puppetry of the Contra of
Uncle Sam who is the handler of puppets
they dance rage and revenge they place
the dead child (the real sleeping baby)
on two chairs which is the bier for
the little actor they dance prayer
bereavement sorrow they mourn
Is there applause for such theater?
Silence then come let us dance
together now you know the usual
dance of couples Spanish or North
American let us dance in twos and
threes let us make little circles let us
dance as though at a festival or in peace-
time together and alone whirling stamping
our feet bowing to one another
the children
gather petals from the floor to throw
at our knees we dance the children
too banging into us into each other and
one small boy dances alone pulling
at our skirts wait he screams stop!
he tugs at the strap of our camera Stop!
stop dancing I’m Carlos take a picture
of me No! Now! Right now! because
soon Look! See Pepe! even tomorrow
I could be dead like him
the music
catches its breath the music
jumping in the guitar and phonograph holds
still and waits no no we say Carlos
not you we put our fingers on his little
shoulder we touch his hair but one of
us is afraid for god’s sake take his
picture so we lift him up we photo-
graph him we pass him from one to
another we photograph him again and
again with each of us crying or
laughing with him in our arms
we dance
~~~
After reading Ash Wednesday
she looked once at the baked beans
and fled. Luncheonless, poor girl,
she observed a kind of poetic Lent—
and I had thought I liked poetry
better than she did.
I do. But to me its most endearing
quality is its unsuitableness;
and, conversely, the chief wonder in heaven
(whither I also am sometimes transported)
is the kind of baggage I bring with me.
Surely there is no more exquisite jointure
in the anatomy of life than that at which
poetry dovetails with the inevitable meal
and Mrs. B. sits murmuring of avocados.
~~~
A yarn ball and a hill  maintain an equipoise until           their neatness starts to bore the gods                     of potential and energy           who hedge bets, reckoning the odds                     of when the rest will be  set in motion, and who,  first stumbling upon this clew,            constructed both the incline and                     the inclination to unwind.            Like most gods, though, they haven’t planned                     to stay; they mastermind  the scheme, ex nihilio,  then slip behind the shadow show            and designate an agent, chief                     remaker of their mischief made.            Each time, disguised, this leitmotif                     gets salvaged and replayed,  a universe begins,  for orogens and origins            suppose a Way Things Were before                     some volatile, untimely That—            sweetness perverted by the core                     or belfry by the bat,  or here, a hilly green,  whose still life, eerily serene,            completes their best contrivance yet:                     from high above, a williwaw,            a hiss, and then the silhouette                     of one terrific paw. 
~~~
before cameras could remember color, back when
the paint had not yet dried
on the world, and where was the fire? Everywhere
under their feet a patchy shining
and nothing tall standing plumb on either side
of the
street,canted saplingsand slow zigguratsin brick,everything
splayed
away from     the kids   who wreck,who make                 these pictures.
Their defenseless foreheads, the wet paving. Each cuts
their eyes at the adult who kneels, who stares
through a black birdhouse.
Their hurry does blur some things
on their way into the box: blousing coats
and bobbed hair, hungry auras. And something
without fail also is tucked
in the arm’s right angle: a ball, an orange,
an infant’s skull. They could not
strive more furiously
if it were an infant’s skull.
~~~
Here’s what I had in mind, kōtiro, this
clipping at words like overgrown maikuku — 
return the blankets of domestic life; don’t fold
washing or wear shoes, polish these rerenga kē.
Eh. But this world.
I s’pose neither of us planned to be in politics,
never did do what others told us to — 
wahanui though, go on, get
your sedition on girl,
your agitator, your defiant speak
to each other eye to eye — 
Māori been jailed for nouns, phrases;
butcher up a clause, get buried
in Pākehā kupu, then dig that
out like the old people. No one approved
of their language either.
 
~~~
It’s a wave, isn’t it? Not a particle.

A fresh, cool wave, so why am I flushed

and not washed? Why dirtier than before?

 

 

1. Etymology

 

On the subject of our names.

They’re so embracing,

thinking they’re all us

 

and swallowing themselves

into our nausea.

 

Yet we never quite die on the spot.

We put off being what we’re called,

we take the hint.

 

Time is never wasted.

It is always spent.

 

 

2. Teleology

 

Sheer fabric trailing through 4 a.m.

I thought it was opaque and earlier.

 

 

3. Mathematics

 

I know you know I know.

And the mirror multiplies inside.

 

The world is no bigger, but next time

do the math,

 

because I wanted to know none

of what I now know twice.

 

 

4. The Principle of the Borg

 

Saying “There’s no one like me”

accomplishes the exact opposite

of what you mean.

 

It is true only insofar as it is true

for everyone equally.

 

So it means you are not special

in any way. Which should be enough for you.

 

 

5. Documentary

 

This clothing, a maladaptive wrapping,

cuts me up. I am a vignette,

 

floated knowingly

since I pulled myself through myself,

 

like a unitard. Too many eyeholes

 

have been cut and pieced together

to make flesh less various with others.

 

 

6. Medicine

 

The cure for embarrassment

is substitution.

 

Strap, don’t pluck.

Baldness makes headlines.

 

Use grass. Use less.

Shorts under your skirt for recess.

 

Redo the surfaces of your wrong turns to make

taking them smoother in the future.

 

 

7. Cosmology

 

Things are less embarrassing

at the cellular level. Remember?

 

We were a whole part of the universe

before Mother busted the party.

 

Before we were ourselves.

Now, like dirty soap, we

 

attract what we repel.

 

 

8. Apology

 

Even the clumsiest fate is perfectly shaped,

so the view took over looking

 

but the sweetest thing I’ve ever known

is obscene with a beautiful

 

sugar rotted down to its truth.

 

Loving you a serious accidental shame

and day flatulates into night,

 

trips and falls in front of millions

into morning.

 

In thrall to this pocus:

the end of fear starts

 

with such an annihilating blush,

with such a stutter.
~~~
if your complexion is a mess
our elixir spells skin success
you’ll have appeal bewitch be adored
hechizando con crema dermoblanqueadora
what we sell is enlightenment
nothing less than beauty itself
since when can be seen in the dark
what shines hidden in dirt
double dutch darky
take kisses back to Africa
they dipped you in a vat
at the wacky chocolate factory
color we’ve got in spades
melanin gives perpetual shade
though rhythm’s no answer to cancer
pancakes pale and butter can get rancid
~~~
I find it helpful to imagine writing in a blizzard
             with every inscription
designed to prevent snow
             crystals from drifting in.
Avoid the hive mind. Go fly a kite,
raise a stained glass window in the sky.
It’s the opposite of making love to drudgery,
             what I do for a dying.
       Remove the bitter sediment
trapped in the brewer. It will be new
whether you make it new
or not. It will be full of neo-
shadows. Full of then — both past and next,
iridescent with suspense. Remember
             time is not the treasure revealer.
More a midge larva creeping
through a waterfall releasing
suction feet. The curiosity rover
       lands on Mars! New is a hooligan.
It breaks the reckoning frame and rests
in pieces. Let me collect its dna
from the tears on your desk.
~~~
“Now, tell me one difference,” my sister says,
“between Old English and New English.”
Well, Old English has a word for our kind
of people: ofermod, literally
“overmind,” or “overheart,”
or “overspirit,” often translated
“overproud.” When the warrior Byrhtnoth,
overfool, invited the Vikings
across the ford at Maldon to fight
his smaller troop at closer range,
his overpride proved deadlier
than the gold-hilted and file-hard
swords the poet gleefully describes — 
and aren’t we like that, high-strung
and ofermod as our daddy and granddaddies
and everybody else
in our stiff-necked mountain town,
always with something stupid to prove,
doing 80 all the way to the head of the holler,
weaving through the double lines;
splinting a door-slammed finger
with popsicle sticks and electrical tape;
not filling out the forms for food stamps
though we know we qualify.
Sister, I’ve seen you cuss rivals,
teachers, doctors, bill collectors,
lawyers, cousins, strangers
at the red light or the Walmart;
you start it, you finish it,
you everything-in-between-it,
whether it’s with your fists,
or a two-by-four, or a car door,
and it doesn’t matter that your foe’s
stronger, taller, better armed.
I don’t tell a soul when I’m down
to flour and tuna and a half-bag of beans,
so you’ve not seen me do without
just to do without, just for spite
at them who told us,
“It’s a sin to be beholden.”
If you’re Byrhtnoth
lying gutted on the ground,
speechifying at the troops he’s doomed,
then I’m the idiot campaigner
fighting beside his hacked-up lord
instead of turning tail,
insisting, “Mind must be the harder,
heart the keener, spirit the greater,
as our strength lessens.”
Now, don’t that sound familiar?
We’ve bought it all our lives
as it’s been sold by drunkards,
bruisers, goaders, soldiers,
braggers with a single code:
you might be undermined, girl,
but don’t you never be undermod.
~~~
It was like soul-kissing, the way the words
filled my mouth as Mrs. Purdy read from her desk.
All the other kids zoned an hour ahead to 3:15,
but Mrs. Purdy and I wandered lonely as clouds borne
by a breeze off Mount Parnassus. She must have seen
the darkest eyes in the room brim: The next day
she gave me a poem she’d chosen especially for me
to read to the all except for me white class.
She smiled when she told me to read it, smiled harder,
said oh yes I could. She smiled harder and harder
until I stood and opened my mouth to banjo playing
darkies, pickaninnies, disses and dats. When I finished
my classmates stared at the floor. We walked silent
to the buses, awed by the power of words.
~~~
First sew yourself into a pom pom mushroom
Strut across the thirstland past faerie lights
Shout complaints inside volcanic mancaves
Scout for the last unlocated spring of ylem
Then plait a cottage out of kestrel fluff
Stir potato eyes into a vat of dislocated feelings
Write a luculent novel five winters long
Till dismay ferments enough nuclear energy to power
Your moon buggy beyond the nacaret fields
Stopping only to gather the pollen of the Umbiferous True
Then plunge over cliffs sporting moth wings
Dropping to the bottommost of the besprinkled sea
And make your way up through the rain shadow
On two cat feet in hostile territory
All the while you compose a callithumpian song
To nail a ritual within the astrobleme
So bend dragons and constellate your enemies
Fox on your shoulder spend a month sun-grazing
A hundred hawks exploding before your stride
Which will bring you luck on this godawful day
You must make a new life by yourself like all
Lurching tellurians stuck in eviternity
~~~
I would try to do it in my way, forgetting Velázquez . . . .  So, little by little, I would paint my Meninas . . . they would be “my” Meninas.                                           — Pablo Picasso



My meninas are as changeable as the moon.Black and white and in color.Happy, sad, and how many words there arefor red enough and the pallor of skin.Their moments of verisimilitude do not outweightheir flashes of pathos. Whole days go bywhen they cannot appreciate the humorof which the dog is one manner, the dwarf another.My meninas are not puppets, but puppet theaters.That it is the puppet master who draws the curtainin the stairwell is pure whimsy on my part.A minuet of despair, andante of foolhardiness.How many times have I tried to explain these differences,the sting of  joy, a lilt of crimson,the dark and the light of the moon not the moon,the soul but a sphere predisposed to rotation?The man in the doorway. The dog who lies sleeping.These are my meninas. The sun in the mirror.The sun and the moon and the man behind the easel,mostly invisible, like the pictures on the wall.The moon is not more changeable, however,than they, my meninas, who never stop changingand waiting on the children of the sunand of the moon, for they will always bemy meninas, their eyes of every minim on the palette,blue and tragical, white on white againsta black ground, until the moon sings every shapeand shade of gray from hope to ample. And again.
~~~
You could grow into it,  that sense of living like a dog,  loyal to being on your own in the fur of your skin,  able to exist only for the sake of existing.  Nothing inside your head lasting long enough for you to hold onto,  you watch your own thoughts leap across your own synapses and disappear— small boats in a wind,         fliers in all that blue,                 the swish of an arm backed with feathers,  a dress talking in a corner,                 and then poof,         your mind clean as a dog’s,  your body big as the world,         important with accident—                blood or a limp, fur and paws.  You swell into survival,         you take up the whole day,  you’re all there is,         everything else is  not you, is every passing glint, is         shadows brought to you by wind,                 passing into a bird’s cheep, replaced by a                                rabbit skittering across a yard,  a void you yourself fall into.  You could make this beautiful,         but you don’t need to,  living is this fleshy side of the bone,         going on is this medicinal smell of the sun—                no dog ever tires of seeing his life  keep showing up at the back door  even as a rotting bone with a bad smell;  feet tottering, he dreams of it,  wakes and licks no matter what.
~~~
Then in the August of my twenty-seventh year,
naked except for my seaclogs,
I greeted an audience of piers.
After my dip, I came up covered
in salt and sand: hair tough as an angel’s.
Who could disappoint me now among the so-coifed?
Disappointing menus for a banquet of twenty-seven.
The hostess cannot hear the hotelier, walls blow ope’;
lousy with wallets and checkbooks, the air. Naked except for
The checks and the monies flapped like birds.
I partook of the seasonal activity
and caught a check in my hands—to myself from myself—
and was caught; I was smart and dumb.
I hadn’t been clobbered in such a long time!
Now, shoved against the carpeted headrest,
I wondered at its cold and slender neck.
The nakeder I feel the happier.
Camp is over, and the children come out
wearing hats; the children are happy for each other,
each camp having been maximally appropriate.
The ocean grew gritty with proteins. I arose
and clomb to the yard with its spigot.
It looked up and blinked. Above, kite strings wrotetoing and froing was the same motion; tiny sighs above the halls
at the county airport; swung on tiny chains;
my father swathed me in two handtowels,
said nexttime, swim in the sea.
A gold thread falls from an eagle’s towel
onto the beach. A gold face big as a quarter of the sky
looks at us with gold-milk tears in its eyes
and the gold girl goes on brushing the countryside
with a twig-broom big as a tree. When our competitor
finishes third, he approaches the throne
with a gold wheel of tillamook.
~~~
The buried temple empties through its bowels, Sepulchral sewer spewing mud and rubies, Abominably some idol of Anubis, Its muzzle all aflame with savage howls.   Or if the recent gas the wick befouls That bears so many insults, it illumines In haggard outline an immortal pubis Flying along the streetlights on its prowls.   What wreaths dried out in cities without prayer Of night could bless like that which settles down Vainly against the marble of Baudelaire   In the fluttering veil that girds her absence round, A tutelary poison, his own Wraith, We breathe in always though it bring us death.      
~~~
White coat and purple coat
   a sleeve from both he sews.
That white is always stained with blood,
   that purple by the rose.
And phantom rose and blood most real
   compose a hybrid style;
white coat and purple coat
   few men can reconcile.
White coat and purple coat
   can each be worn in turn
but in the white a man will freeze
   and in the purple burn.
~~~
Strephon, your breach of faith and trust      Affords me no surprise; A man who grateful was, or just,      Might make my wonder rise. That heart to you so fondly tied,      With pleasure wore its chain, But from your cold neglectful pride,      Found liberty again. For this no wrath inflames my mind,      My thanks are due to thee; Such thanks as gen'rous victors find,     Who set their captives free.
~~~
married a woman who was perfectly happy
                                                                     to turn half their apartment
into a laboratory
                               including the cadavers necessary to her husband’s
explorations in surgery.
                                      He also wrote articles on the ears of birds and
in Latin, an anatomist, standing motionless
                                                                     in the middle of the road
                                                              thinking
that electricity must activate the blood
                                                             while the muscles, themselves
living Leyden jars, flowered among
                                                        those who found it difficult
to believe that electricity is an animal
                                                            lost in a garden of showering towers
and, as with all living things, a certain degree
                                                                         of the domestic filtered down
between his hands to land
                                           in a dusting of involuntary silver across
the surface of every nerve.
~~~
Lynette, the stars are kerned so far apart—Through a herniated zodiac I almost see your waled skylanes, your shocked Capricorn and Cancer.In the hundred and two years since you were born, and the sixteen since your heart failed, and the nearly sixty since you gave up poetry, it seems we can’t navigate by the same star chart.I’d like to think we were fated to work the same coracle: you steering with one hand, grasping your corner of the seine while I grasp mine; together sweeping the weirs.Lynette saw the sky made wide-waled corduroy by the flight paths of fighter jets.Corde du roi—“Cloth of the king.”(“A baseless assertion,” states the oed.)A fireman from the Midlands nfs said the raids on Swansea were worse than on Birmingham, where a ten-year-old Roy Fisher gaped at the garden where his cousins were slaughtered, and later wrote, It was like a burst pod filled with clay.Last night, Lynette, my son thought he saw his father in the jumbo jet roaring over Cherryhurst: the weather softer, flight paths altered.Three weeks now his father gone.                                                                             •Insofar as Moses came to in a coracle, it wasn’t a Welsh one-off; it wasn’t a hapax of vessels.Insofar as it’s kind of a kiddie boat, not a kayak, not the royal barge the Makah sent William Blake, aka Johnny Depp, with into the northern Pacific; not even the Viking ship, its carved prow like an uncial; insofar as it is calico wrapped up in tar, insofar as it is swaddled willow whippets.                                                                             •“Pastoral ding-dong is out,” Lynette wrote, and no wonder— bombs hidden on the glossy knolls. In the sorrel. In the tormentil.I thought she was perhaps the closest I could get to my grandmother.While Lynette was writing “Displaced Persons”—                   Neither from the frosted leaf nor from                   The grey hard ground could they find                   Relief
~~~
 
Sometimes the blue in Blue Hawaii
gets lost. But Elvis’s eyes speak
pure Esperanto.
 
~~~
Ah, how poets sing and die!
Make one song and Heaven takes it;
Have one heart and Beauty breaks it;
Chatterton, Shelley, Keats and I—
Ah, how poets sing and die!
~~~
Lynda Hull



Maybe you sold it to buy junk. Though I like to think not.And I don't want to think you used the money for foodor rent or anything obligatory, practical.

A pair of boots, perhaps. Thigh high burgandy boots
with gold laces. Something crucial as lilies.
Mostly, I want to believe you held onto the book,
that your fingers brailed those pages' inky veins
even in your final weeks. I want to believe
words can be that important in the end.
Who can help the heart, which is grand and full
of gestures? I had been on my way out.
He was rearranging his bookshelves
when, in an approximation of tenderness, 
he handed me, like the last of the sweet potatoes
at Thanksgiving, like a thing he wanted
but was willing to share, the rediscovered book—
he'd bought it years ago in a used bookstore
in Chicago. Levine's poems, with your signature inside.
That whole year I spent loving him, something splendid
as lemons, sour and bright and leading my tongue
toward new language, was on the shelf. These
weren't your own poems, autographed, a stranger's
souvenir—we'd spent vain months leafing through
New York stacks for your out-of-print collections—but you'd cared
about this book, or cared enough to claim it, your name
looped across the title page as if to say, Please.This is mine, This book is mine. Though you sold it.
Or someone else did when you died.
We make habits out of words. I grew accustomed
to his, the way they spooned me into sleep
so many times. Now I am sleepless and alone
another night. What would you give for one more night
alone? No booze. No drugs. Just that hunger
and those words. He gave me The Names of the Lost.
Need comes down hard on a body. What else
was sold? What else—do you know?—did we lose
 
~~~
Reader unmov’d and Reader unshaken, Reader unseduc’d   
and unterrified, through the long-loud and the sweet-still   
I creep toward you. Toward you, I thistle and I climb.
I crawl, Reader, servile and cervine, through this blank   
season, counting—I sleep and I sleep. I sleep,
Reader, toward you, loud as a cloud and deaf, Reader, deaf
as a leaf. Reader: Why don’t you turn
pale?
~~~
My dear, you are the high-speed car chase, and I,   
I am the sheet of glass being carefully carried   
across the street by two employees of Acme Moving   
who have not parked on the right side   
because the plot demands that they make   
the perilous journey across traffic,   
and so they are cursing as rehearsed   
as they angle me into the street, acting as if   
they intend to get me to the department store, as if   
I will ever take my place as the display window, ever clear   
the way for a special exhibit at Christmas, or be Windexed   
once a day, or even late at night, be pressed against   
by a couple who can’t make it back to his place,   
and so they angle me into the street, a bright lure,   
a provocative claim, their teaser, and indeed   
you can’t resist my arguments, fatally flawed   
though they are, so you come careening to but and butt   
and rebut, you come careening, you being   
both cars, both chaser and chased, both good and bad, both   
done up with bullets that haven’t yet done you in.   
I know I’m done for: there’s only one street   
on this set and you’ve got a stubborn streak a mile long.   
I can smell the smoke already.   
                                                No matter, I’d rather shatter   
than be looked through all day. So come careening; I know   
you’ve other clichés to hammer home: women with groceries   
to send spilling, canals to leap as the bridge is rising.   
And me? I’m so through. I’ve got a thousand places to be.
~~~
Forgive me, if I wound your ear,
     By calling of you Nancy,Which is the name of my sweet friend,
     The other’s but her fancy.Ah, dearest girl! how could your mind
     The strange distinction frame?The whimsical, unjust caprice,
     Which robs you of your name.Nancy agrees with what we see
     A being wild and airy;Gay as a nymph of Flora’s train,
     Fantastic as a fairy.But Anna’s of a different kind,
     A melancholy maid,Boasting a sentimental soul,
     In solemn pomp arrayed.Oh ne’er will I forsake the sound,
     So artless and so freeBe what you will with all mankind,
     But Nancy still with me.
~~~
for Sappho



Let my music be found wanting
in comparison
to yours (as it must)
let me be found loving
(as you were)
extravagantly the beautiful
let me find you
and the song (forever)
between us
in these terrible times
~~~
listen, a bad thing happened to
my friend’s marriage, can’t tell you
only can tell my own story which
so far isn’t so bad:
“Dad” and I stay married. so far.
so good. so so.
But it felt undoable. This lucky life
every day, every day. every, day.
(all the poetry books the goddamn same
until one guy gets up and stuns the audience.)
Joe Wenderoth, not by a long shot
sober, says, I promised my wife I wouldn’t fuck
anyone
~~~
None of it’s there that you cared for, so familiarfurniture and paintings. The medals aren’t there eitherI’m still there but it isn’t; I’m here; sword,I have sword — imagine — and disguising protect-ive the ancient helmet. Her head was cut offnonetheless. The man brought the head alongto the doctor: the head said to. Shouldn’t webring the body I asked in case he wants to re-attach them Oh, the head hadn’t thought of that.What do you have instead of a body, there?We have a wholeness of perception what we areasking you to do for us, write down our poemscreates a body. Otherwise our body ... isn’tthat we aren’t sensuous ... but we decohere,you must understand that the universe is always developing or changing its face — body — whatever; we have always been itbut it’s never quite right ... pilot’s license;my pilot’s license is a fossil, you said. Weneed yours. We need your license.When Momma first, the very first hallucinationthat the decompression tube in her stomach was black ...    It isn’t black I said over the phone well I thoughtit was she said, not being fanciful, and I was in a motel in Colorado at the time. Whose headwas it really I repeat. For we never leave hereand nothing fossilizes but stonelike mossypatterns might be made, colors transformedwalk to the hospital, everyone’s mad at me, who cares?It was my whole soul transported and all its certaintiesthat I existed, beneath all the legends, otherwiseas joy.
~~~
“What can or ought
the public care
about
the identity
of the portrait?”
said James McNeill.
Did he look down
from neutral heaven
on the dealer wearing
flannel plaid, adjusting
to my denim chair,
to make the arrangement,
pocket my check
in black and smudge and white?
The agents said
they could easily find it
if I had no carbon.
FBI with their silk knots
and sober suiting
just like the famous oil
though on different
body parts.
I could be
Mrs. Whistler,
but I was
the dupe,
eyes lowered,
the menswear pair
noble shadows,
tracking down
the evil and clever
eBay forger (not
the original cormorant-tousled Martinez
I thought I was purchasing
with his true (M) mark
from his 19th-century hand).
Inspectors with their pointed
interrogations — they were way
beyond clues — 
who when they left
would form, and be,
long shadows
at each end of day.
Make shapes you might assume
would fall
from mountain goats
in frightening terrain.
They reported answers
they knew all along.
Thigh-high in paintings,
I thought to wade out
with my honest eyes
so little notorious,
from mistaken
tonalists, expressionists,
Society of Six ...    
The crook posed in tartan,
I fine-tuned
to the agents;
he talked ordinary — that was my best judgment.
So what? He warmed, and got richer in,
my denim wingback.
I thought of Anna’s
stern profile; and were they
profilers?
And as they shook
my hand good-bye, I said,Do your wives collect anything?
What do you think?
they implied.
~~~
Roads around mountainscause we can’t drivethroughThat’s Poetryto Me.
~~~
 
 
                       at the altarpiece of Saint Teresa
 
 



No need to be coy—
you know what
she’s doing
 
 And so did Bernini,
when he found Teresa
in the full-throttle of
her divine vision,
            caught her at it,
 
carving this surrender
so fluidly you expect
the impossible:
 
for her tang to swell up, ripe
as seafoam, from the gulf
of her flushed and falling
figure. Perhaps this is how
 
God comes to us,
or should come to us, all:
 
the bluntly and
beautifully corporeal at
 
prayers in the Sunday
school of pleasure. Why
 
shouldn’t He come to us
as He did to Teresa? A saint
 
on her back—
a girl tearing open
the gift He gave her?
~~~
This is the song of the mud, The pale yellow glistening mud that covers the hills like satin; The grey gleaming silvery mud that is spread like enamel over the valleys; The frothing, squirting, spurting, liquid mud that gurgles along the road beds; The thick elastic mud that is kneaded and pounded and squeezed under the hoofs of the horses; The invincible, inexhaustible mud of the war zone. 
This is the song of the mud, the uniform of the poilu. His coat is of mud, his great dragging flapping coat, that is too big for him and too heavy; His coat that once was blue and now is grey and stiff with the mud that cakes to it. This is the mud that clothes him. His trousers and boots are of mud, And his skin is of mud; And there is mud in his beard. His head is crowned with a helmet of mud. He wears it well. He wears it as a king wears the ermine that bores him. He has set a new style in clothing; He has introduced the chic of mud. 
This is the song of the mud that wriggles its way into battle. The impertinent, the intrusive, the ubiquitous, the unwelcome, The slimy inveterate nuisance, That fills the trenches, That mixes in with the food of the soldiers, That spoils the working of motors and crawls into their secret parts, That spreads itself over the guns, That sucks the guns down and holds them fast in its slimy voluminous lips, That has no respect for destruction and muzzles the bursting shells; And slowly, softly, easily, Soaks up the fire, the noise; soaks up the energy and the courage; Soaks up the power of armies; Soaks up the battle. Just soaks it up and thus stops it. 
This is the hymn of mud-the obscene, the filthy, the putrid, The vast liquid grave of our armies. It has drowned our men. Its monstrous distended belly reeks with the undigested dead. Our men have gone into it, sinking slowly, and struggling and slowly disappearing. Our fine men, our brave, strong, young men; Our glowing red, shouting, brawny men. Slowly, inch by inch, they have gone down into it, Into its darkness, its thickness, its silence. Slowly, irresistibly, it drew them down, sucked them down, And they were drowned in thick, bitter, heaving mud. Now it hides them, Oh, so many of them! Under its smooth glistening surface it is hiding them blandly. There is not a trace of them. There is no mark where they went down. The mute enormous mouth of the mud has closed over them.
 This is the song of the mud, The beautiful glistening golden mud that covers the hills like satin; The mysterious gleaming silvery mud that is spread like enamel over the valleys. Mud, the disguise of the war zone; Mud, the mantle of battles; Mud, the smooth fluid grave of our soldiers: This is the song of the mud.
~~~
O what a strange parcel of creatures are we, Scarce ever to quarrel, or even agree; We all are alone, though at home altogether, Except to the fire constrained by the weather; Then one says, ‘’Tis cold’, which we all of us know, And with unanimity answer, ‘’Tis so’: With shrugs and with shivers all look at the fire, And shuffle ourselves and our chairs a bit nigher; Then quickly, preceded by silence profound, A yawn epidemical catches around: Like social companions we never fall out, Nor ever care what one another’s about; To comfort each other is never our plan, For to please ourselves, truly, is more than we can.
~~~
California night. The Devil’s wind,   
the Santa Ana, blows in from the east,   
raging through the canyon like a drunk   
screaming in a bar.
                            The air tastes like
a stubbed-out cigarette. But why complain?   
The weather’s fine as long as you don’t breathe.   
Just lean back on the sweat-stained furniture,   
lights turned out, windows shut against the storm,   
and count your blessings.
                                     Another sleepless night,
when every wrinkle in the bedsheet scratches   
like a dry razor on a sunburned cheek,   
when even ten-year whiskey tastes like sand,   
and quiet women in the kitchen run   
their fingers on the edges of a knife
and eye their husbands’ necks. I wish them luck.
Tonight it seems that if I took the coins
out of my pocket and tossed them in the air   
they’d stay a moment glistening like a net   
slowly falling through dark water.
                                                   I remember
the headlights of the cars parked on the beach,   
the narrow beams dissolving on the dark   
surface of the lake, voices arguing
about the forms, the crackling radio,   
the sheeted body lying on the sand,
the trawling net still damp beside it. No,
she wasn’t beautiful—but at that age
when youth itself becomes a kind of beauty—
“Taking good care of your clients, Marlowe?”
Relentlessly the wind blows on. Next door   
catching a scent, the dogs begin to howl.   
Lean, furious, raw-eyed from the storm,   
packs of coyotes come down from the hills   
where there is nothing left to hunt.
~~~
My letters! all dead paper, ... mute and white ! —
And yet they seem alive and quivering
Against my tremulous hands which loose the string
And let them drop down on my knee to-night.
This said, ... he wished to have me in his sight
Once, as a friend: this fixed a day in spring
To come and touch my hand ... a simple thing,
Yet I wept for it! — this, ... the paper's light ...
Said, Dear, I love thee; and I sank and quailed
As if God's future thundered on my past.
This said, I am thine — and so its ink has paled
With lying at my heart that beat too fast.
And this ... O Love, thy words have ill availed,
If, what this said, I dared repeat at last!
~~~
1.
I was born on a Tuesday in April.
I didn't cry. Not because I was stunned. I wasn't even mad.
I was the lucky egg, trained for gratitude
inside the belly for nine months straight.
Two workers welded bunk beds at the end
of the delivery room. One on top of the other.
My universe might have been the white lime ceiling,
or the embodiment of Einstein's bent space
in the aluminum springs of the bed above
that curved toward the center.
Neither cold, nor warm.
"It was a clear day," my mother told me.
It's hard to believe
there were a few romantic evenings
when I was conceived, a buzz in the retina
and red-laced magma
decadently peeling off
a silver candlestick.
Infants' cries and milk fever
turned to salt from the stench of bleach—
abrasive, unequivocal.
With a piece of cloth wrapped on the end of a stick,
the janitor casually extends the negative space
of the black-and-white tiled floor
like a mouth of broken teeth, a baleen of darkness
sieving out new human destinies.
 
 
2.
1968. At the dock, ships arriving from the East
dumped punctured rice bags, mice
and the delirium of the Cultural Revolution.
A couple of men in uniform
cleared out the church
in the middle of the night.
The locals saw the priest in the yard
wearing only his underwear, shivering from the cold.
Their eyes, disillusioned, questioned one another:
"Wasn't he the one who pardoned our sins?"
 
Icons burned in front of their eyes,
icons and the holy scriptures.
Witnesses stepped farther back,
as if looking at love letters
nobody dared to claim.
 
Crosses were plucked from graves. And from each mouth
spilled irreversible promises:
mounds of dirt the rains would smooth down
sooner or later.
 
Children dragged church bells by the tongue.
(Why didn’t they think of this before?)
Overnight, the dome was demolished, instantly revealing
a myriad of nameless stars that chased the crowd
like flies on a dead horse.
 
And what could replace Sunday mass now?
Women brought cauldrons into the yard.
Men filled up their pipes; smoke rose
into the air, against gravity's pull.
Nails in worn out shoes exposed stigmata
that bled in the wrong places—
a new code of sanctification,
of man, by man.
 
 
3.
"Read!"—I was told. Who said that?
Angel Gabriel, or my first-grade teacher
who had dark roots underneath her bleached curls?
 
Language arrived fragmentary
split in syllables, spasmodic
like code in times of war.
 
"Continue where your classmate left off!"
A long sentence tied us to one another
without connotation as if inside an idiom.
Someone would get to read the noun, another the verb,
a third one a pronoun. . .
I always got the exclamation mark at the end—
a mere grimace, a small curse.
 
A tall cast-iron stove below the portrait of the dictator,
puffing smoke from its temples, enough heat for everyone.
On the blackboard,    
leftover diphthongs from yesterday or the day before
rubbed against one another like kittens.
 
After dusk, I looked for another language outside the window,
my eyes glued to a constellation
(they call these types "dreamers")
my discovery possibly a journey into the past,
toward a galaxy already dead, nonexistent,
the kind of news that needs millions of years
to reach me.
 
"Read!"—the angel shook me for a third time
her finger pointing to an arbitrary word
a million light years apart from its object. (It didn't matter who
       was first).
Negative space sketched my onomatopoeic profile
of body and shadow in an accidental encounter.
 
 
4.
Language is erosive.
It makes us recluses,
a wind through the canyons
carving our paleontological eras
for everyone to read.
 
Under the revised testament of my skin
bellows a gold-cast bull, an alluring object,
a need for attention.
Then comes the unleavened bread and a last supper,
which, remarkably, is repeated several times
between ice ages.
Lower yet, Sodom.
I recognize it from the stench of sulfur.
 
I hold my nose. Freud would have done the same.
And then Cain,
a crow taught him how to bury his own brother. . .
And at the bottom,
Adam’s gentlemanlike sin
under which scientists
discover earlier epochs of famine.
 
Between unidentified layers,
wanderings in the sand, the search for a new prophet. . .
 
I try to understand my people.
Their language is plain. Some words,
were actually never uttered, like pages stuck together
in a book fresh off the press
and long after it sits on a shelf.
 
This, too, lives inside me
within insidious bubbles of air, negative
spaces where I can find little historical rest,
but also where utter ruin may originate.
 
5.
Little left of the snow three days ago.
Its blanket ripped away, exposing
dog shit and the bruises of routine.
 
Negative space gives form to the woods
and to the mad woman—a silhouette
of the goddess Athena
wearing a pair of flip flops,
an owl on her shoulder.
 
It’s minus zero. The factory’s gate gnashes its teeth
behind the back of the last worker. Blowing noses, shivering,
     mucus. . .
A virus circulates through the workplace,
secretly, intimately touching one person after another,
a current of sensuality.
It softens the tone.
But nothing unites them more than their frailty,
The one-sizes-fits-all shoes you must grow accustomed to
By filling the extra space with cotton,
Or curling your ill-fitting toes.
 
6.
In Halil’s yard,
rules were sacrilege.
His eight children entertained themselves
by carrying famine on their shoulders,
recalling St. Bartholomew’s flayed skin.
Starving, filthy, hazel-eyed—
three qualities that unexpectedly coalesce
in the bright light, strung together like sneezes.
 
One’s famine was another’s consolation.
“Look at them! It’s a sin for us to complain.
They’re even worse off than us!”
But even Halil found his own consolation
in the old woman Zyra, “barren and paralyzed,”
the root origin of despair.
 
This was our highlands landscape,
hierarchical, where each family
would make out a different expiration date
on the roof below their own.
 Schadenfreude was the only river
that could turn mills.
 
But if this hierarchy shifted,
and our roof gave signs of ruin,
my mother would plant tulips in the garden,
white tulips, our false image,
a scarecrow to keep predators away.
 
 
7.
Nearly nothing was mentioned in the letters he sent from prison,
just two lines, on top of the page:
“I am well. . .” and “If you can,
please send me a pair of woolen socks.”
 
From them, I learned to read between the lines:
negative spaces, the unsaid, gestures,
insomnia that like a hat’s shadow
fails to shade your chin and ears.
 
And in the photographs’ white background,
acrophobia adds to the color of their eyes: blue,
green, gray, and ultimately, chesnut brown,
as, earthward, we lower our gaze.
 
I learned to read the empty spaces the dead left
behind—a pair of folded glasses
after the reading’s done and discourse commences.
 
Or the musical chairs game called "love,"
where there are less empty seats than people.
If you don’t want to be the last one standing
you must predict when the music will stop.
(Who, though, has really succeeded?)
 
Perhaps a little practice can be useful in this case.
I don’t mean squatting, jumping, stretching,
but listening to the same music every day from the start,
the same miserable vinyl record
so that you’ll recognize its cracks
before it recognizes yours.
 
 
8.
Midnight. Snoring,
meaningless sounds that stain the side of the wall
that belongs to no one.
So where are we? What dimension?
Who foots the bill at a time like this
without lambs or sinners,
when even angels record nothing?
 
The street’s clearly visible
under the neon 24-hour-service sign
above the funeral home.
There was a music shop next to it
that closed down a few months ago;
the shop shared a wall with the funeral home,
shared the same water pipes and the same gate to heaven.
But the coffins won,
the wide-shouldered coffins that narrow down
in the shape of a mummy, not a human.
Wood of the highest quality, swears the owner,
and pure silk inside, pleated like a stomach
that can digest even a bulldozer.
 
When asleep we're simply five limbs. Starfish.
If you cut one limb, it will grow back.
Even a single limb could recreate us from the beginning,
     a single hope.
Negative space is always fertile.
 
 
9.
No one knows if it was simply a matter of mixed
or some other reason why I used to see
what I wasn't supposed to see—
the ending of things.
It wasn’t a mystical gift, but like a blood clot
in the darkness of a vein, I held on to reason,
as it circulated from the bottom up
and not the other way around as we were told.
I used to start from the edges
and with my left hand or a croupier’s stick
gather the balls and dice from the corners
and then watch the bettors
as neither a winner nor a loser.
There's nothing sillier
than watching a film in reverse
where after the climax, the protagonists
are replaced by circumstances,
and circumstances replaced by minor characters,
their tongues plastered behind a single, fatal smirk
Life and my short lunar calendar slipped away
like carbon paper sending off as much light as necessary,
skipping the details, the contrast and sharp colors.
Lunar time is short. Until the actual end,
there are years enough, the negative spaces.
What to do with them when the verb
has already been uttered, a conclusive sentence
with Latin syntax, or more than that:
didactic.
~~~
1778-1830



Between the wet trees and the sorry steeple, Keep, Time, in dark Soho, what once was Hazlitt, Seeker of Truth, and finder oft of Beauty; Beauty’s a sinking light, ah, none too faithful; But Truth, who leaves so here her spent pursuer, Forgets not her great pawn: herself shall claim it. Therefore sleep safe, thou dear and battling spirit, Safe also on our earth, begetting ever Some one love worth the ages and the nations! Nothing falls under thine eyes eternal. Sleep safe in dark Soho: the stars are shining, Titian and Woodsworth live; the People marches.
~~~
I maaku
You told me ba ko tangirai
I maaku
I maaku
My arms were awkward so ko taua baiu
I maaku
I maaku
The dancer trembles because te ruoia is a kind of sorcery
I maaku
I maaku
The frigate birds fly high above us and I’m afraid of falling
I maaku
~~~
for John



At a party I spy a handsome psychiatrist,
And wish, as we all do, to get her advice for free.
Doctor, I’ll say, I’m supposed to be a poet.
All life’s awfulness has been grist to me.
We learn that happiness is a Chinese meal,
While sorrow is a nourishment forever.
My new environment is California Dreamer.
I’m fearful I’m forgetting how to brood.
And, Doctor, another thing has got me worried:
I’m not drinking as much as I should . . .
 
At home, I want to write a happy poem
On love, or a love poem of happiness.
But they won’t do, the tensions of every day,
The rub, the minor abrasions of any two
Who share one space. Ah, there’s no substitute for tragedy!
But in this chapter, tragedy belongs
To that other life, the old life before us.
Here is my aphorism of the day:
Happy people are monogamous.
Even in California. So how does the poem play
 
Without the paraphernalia of betrayal and loss?
I don’t have a jealous eye or fear
And neither do you. In truth, I’m fond
Of your ex-mate, whom I name “my wife-in-law.”
My former husband, that old disaster, is now just funny,
So laugh we do, in what Cyril Connolly
Has called the endless, nocturnal conversation
Of marriage. Which may be the best part.
Darling, must I love you in light verse
Without the tribute of profoundest art?
 
Of course it won’t last. You will break my heart
Or I yours, by dying. I could weep over that.
But now it seems forced, here in these heaven hills,
The mourning doves mourning, the squirrels mating,
My old cat warm in my lap, here on our terrace
As from below comes a musical cursing
As you mend my favorite plate. Later of course
I could pick a fight; there is always material in that.
But we don’t come from fighting people, those
Who scream out red-hot iambs in their hate.
 
No, love, the heavy poem will have to come
From temps perdu, fertile with pain, or perhaps
Detonated by terrors far beyond this place
Where the world rends itself, and its tainted waters
Rise in the east to erode our safety here.
Much as I want to gather a lifetime thrift
And craft, my cunning skills tied in a knot for you,
There is only this useless happiness as gift.﻿
~~~
Not forced to fall for hideous Phaon,
nor to drift dreamlike from
a Victorian cliff, pursued by visions
of slender limbs, peach-soft hair,
dewy violets clustered
in an unwilling lap, not exiled
on a distant island for writing
smartly about love, not called amoral
nor forgotten, not murdered
by a jealous lover, nor weakened
from drink, did not make an incision
in the veins, never murdered
in a tavern at twenty-nine
nor thought mad, released immediately
from St. Luke's Hospital for Lunatics,
freed from Northampton
General Lunatic Asylum,
cured of syphilis, not mad
nor ruined by drink nor shot
in the head, the rope unknotted
and fluidly slid from the lamp-
post, sauntered away with a sideways
crawl up the Champs-Élysées,
never sickened from drink
nor drowned in the Gulf of Spezia,
the heart kept tight swam madly
toward shore, disappeared down
the glistening beach skipping
happily in the direction of England,
staved off fever while fighting
for Greeks, lived, wrote, erased
the blood-stained pillowcase, married Fanny,
moved to Finland, fathered several
pink-skinned children, lay down for a rest
in the Baltimore street, got up
confused about Spanish port and
went to the graveyard to sleep it off,
laudanum, opium, stroke, paralysis,
aphasia, angels, threads of exotic Delacroix
visions, but everything was put right
when mom said, "Come on home,
I want to care for you," left the house
and walked into the river until
the water level covered the hairline
then shed the heavy Edwardian garments
and broke into a birdlike breaststroke
exclaiming, "How lovely to be free
of the sickbed!" never destroyed by drink,
sang while removing the shrapnel from
a soldier, recovered from the Spanish flu,
returned to Poland all debts forgiven
by appreciative readers from the Congo,
replaced the bottle of Lysol among toxic
rats enjoying a sauna under the sink,
did not pull the trigger or push the chair
out from under the revolution
while screaming about the army of the arts,
put on a jacket and sailed to Mexico,
calmly came up on deck, folded
the jacket over the rail, and then—
arrested by a vision of spread-eagled sailors
descending like angels through
the turquoise sky—decided not
to swallow the sea, freed from Payne Whitney,
walked right on through the psychiatric
state hospital and out the other side,
had no psychotic break while on acid
in a land of dreamlike torch singers
masquerading as Satanists, never touched the stuff,
the dead liver tissue miraculously mended,
smoker's cough silenced, cured by the sea air
of old gray Gloucester, jumped into
the beach taxi and drove down the beach
gesticulating gaily toward the setting sun,
not undone, unloved, forgotten, nor
filled with despair, not punished for talking
with angels, not unhappy nor alone,
not misrepresented nor misunderstood
nor nauseous from drink or drugs or depression,
loved respected and read
long-lived healthy and happy
celebrated by all in life before
dying contented in a comfortable bed.
~~~
Written in A Moment of Exasperation



How can you lie so still? All day I watch And never a blade of all the green sod moves To show where restlessly you toss and turn, And fling a desperate arm or draw up knees Stiffened and aching from their long disuse; I watch all night and not one ghost comes forth To take its freedom of the midnight hour. Oh, have you no rebellion in your bones? The very worms must scorn you where you lie, A pallid mouldering acquiescent folk, Meek habitants of unresented graves. Why are you there in your straight row on row Where I must ever see you from my bed That in your mere dumb presence iterate The text so weary in my ears: "Lie still And rest; be patient and lie still and rest." I'll not be patient! I will not lie still! There is a brown road runs between the pines, And further on the purple woodlands lie, And still beyond blue mountains lift and loom; And I would walk the road and I would be Deep in the wooded shade and I would reach The windy mountain tops that touch the clouds. My eyes may follow but my feet are held. Recumbent as you others must I too Submit? Be mimic of your movelessness With pillow and counterpane for stone and sod? And if the many sayings of the wise Teach of submission I will not submit But with a spirit all unreconciled Flash an unquenched defiance to the stars. Better it is to walk, to run, to dance, Better it is to laugh and leap and sing, To know the open skies of dawn and night, To move untrammeled down the flaming noon, And I will clamour it through weary days Keeping the edge of deprivation sharp, Nor with the pliant speaking on my lips Of resignation, sister to defeat. I'll not be patient. I will not lie still. And in ironic quietude who is The despot of our days and lord of dust Needs but, scarce heeding, wait to drop Grim casual comment on rebellion's end; "Yes, yes . . Wilful and petulant but now As dead and quiet as the others are." And this each body and ghost of you hath heard That in your graves do therefore lie so still.
~~~
I
A boy was covered in pigeons.
He put birdseed in his hair and crotch so the ghostbird
would descend and devour him.
I saw the brown bird with the yellow breast
smoking Lucky Strikes. Thought she might be the Holy Spirit.
There are no birds only what this typewriter flushes out.
The cliffs are made from stone doves.
And the boys had beautiful lips.
II
The Outside suggests a tunnel to ride what he
says through a tunnel. Geography, animal life, the eventual
human being. Anatomy on the page
is sexier, my ghost.
The page of real thigh, my mister,
opens at the top to be eaten like
the sun you can recognize eats her rays. Greasy misery
covers my hands. It bothers
me to touch a carcass. Dead branches. Bothers me.
III
God's big eye is a pink cubicle.
God's big eye stretches
around me, a great balled gown.
I look for him in the roots of the roofless space.Mons pubis corresponds to the real bird.
The lung. The wing.
IV
I demand the air beat. The birds scared
up into motion and I expect
revelation. I have my lusty knife.
Left cigarettes on your grave
and chant. J is for Jerusalem. Returns the poet to an invisible
homeland.
Resurrects the liver.
           Saying goodbye to a ghost is a hoax.
The birds are still in flight. Unhook the birds.
V
Sick orange sky I hate
I shall see it opened, the sunny aftertomb
and a real poem at the gate.
The erratic footprints of birds upon the sand or lacerations.
No limbs at our disposal, only the desire of limbs to reflesh.
The ghost gestures.
I am filling your borders with letters.
This is the new word—get up and live.
 
~~~
 Sei allem Abschied voran: half a line from Rilke’s Die Sonette   an Orpheus as my motto, I rehearsed my elegiac art (“be in advance of all parting”) and won, I thought, with each song deeper, until I stood before the keeper in whom I’ve come to recognize myself. 
~~~
        I 
This is a place without a terrain a government that always
          changes an unstable language. Even buildings disappear
          from day to day.
[gendered pronoun] wanders in this place
                                                                       [searching
                                                                                                [waiting
the condition of unbearableness is the constant state of mind
            for all occupants
we read all day in the village square during the rule of [name
          of major historical figure] a book that is so subtle
                                                   [its political content goes unnoticed
what is political content?
                                                          [the question or the statement
[gender pronoun] creates
                                        [a reader culture
                                        [generic plural pronoun] prefer both
                                                      II
realism's authenticities are not the question
the question [role of art in the State
we know art is fundamental to the [New State] as is evidenced
         in village scenes, majestic ancient views, masses and
         masses of [generic human figures] marching in columns,
         swords coded as plowshares, image as spectacle
we kn0w [name of city], [adjective], [name of major composer]
to recode [reduce] it: Linz, ambiguous, Wagner
we know [name of major historical figure] calls, authentically,
         for a more total, more radical war than we can even
         dream in the language of the avant-garde
we know a commercial promises to reduce plaque more
         effectively in this same tone
but sometimes we exceed even our own expectations to
          surprise even ourselves
something encloses the impossible in a fable
an unreal world called real because it is so heavily metaphoric
we can't keep our fingers of connection out of it
 
it is a ride in the country, the car crowded with children
                                                   [each child represents a different
                                                              ethnicity of [name of nation]
it is a moment of standing with light resonating around [major
          historical figure
it is a guiding of the child towards the right path
it is a picnic in a field, the spread is bountiful
[the spread of [name of nation] is represented through the
          arrangement of food on the checkered tablecloth
it is [name of major historical figure]'s Art Collection:
           figure after figure
           each carries spears, lunges, draws the arm back to pull
                   tight the bow
a ruined plaza has a [gendered human form] at its en
        trance
a [generic child] draws a sword under the guidance of
[generic possessive pronoun] [honorific denoting repro-
ductive role]
a [generic human form] raises [generic pronoun] arms and
four horses turn away
another plays a lute
an eagle holds a symbol
fake [name of nation used as an adjective] heads
while the end of lunacy in art was explicit in [name of major
         historical figure]'s rhetoric
while when nation turns to art, art loses its divergence
while the [generic human figures] come back from war, their
         legs in fog
while a [generic human figure] sculpts, small against the
          expanse of marble, giving into the monumental human
          form that symbolizes eugenic possibilities
while another [generic human figure] pedantically draws
          postcards of village centers, operas, mountain vistas
while overwhelmed by an opera [name of major historical 
          figure] plans genocide
                                                    III
we know we respond resistantly as faked children's books of
         realist adventure tales have turned into military instruc-
         tion manuals
or [name of major historical figure] hails a cab, [generic
          possessive human pronoun] hand raised here, beckoning
          as the red flag with [name of fast food chain] waves
          behind [generic human pronoun] and the red star on top  
          of the [name of cultural landmark in major city] twinkles.
many people raise their hands for different purposes all day
         long
we are always waiting for our cab to come
the question here is the same as that of a relationship
where does art define our vocabulary?
the margin declares
[it is impossible to speak about something
it is only possible to speak beside it
                                         
                                          [a film with a voice-over of nonsense
to act in the unsecular forbidden margins [claims a certain
         privilege]
                         [generic human pronoun] cast a colonizing eye
a scripture of space / a place where
a [generic human form] twists in space
                                                               [follow this body]
getting you to recognize yourself in [generic possessive
           pronoun] work
                                                                                    [is kidnapping]
in the space of this question some emigrate or lapse into total
         silence
some co-opt this language and paint a series of meticulous and 
          beautifully colored monumental images of people impris-
          oned and alone at the edge of a tedious despair
some [refigure [refuse] respond] call out for an end
rewritten, the goal of the artist is to prevent reality in a true and
            concrete manner
                                                       IV
[generic human figure] claims I can get more information at
         home than by going to the war scene
what [generic pronoun] sees is [gendered naked bodies] in
          news photos—dead bodies, discarded bodies, junk
 
i  saw  this written on the bottom 
                                                                                 [a way of testimony
the poverty of image among the people of [name of nation]
the continual increase in the amount of image a viewer can
          tolerate
                                                        [who went to [name of nation?
returning again and again to images of torture
covert activities depicted              [blown up
                                                                                   [to show power
                                                              details of photographs
                                                              or Xerox degradations
                                                              of photos on Duraclear
                                                              hang loose are
                                                              vulnerable and
                                                              fragmentary and
                                                              images are seen
                                                              through images and/or
                                                              viewers
[call this]
                the fate of Madame Bovery, the fate of Anna Karenina
A dog with a [generic human face] has slogans coming out 
          of its mouth as angels hold its head back suckle at its
          tits
taped to a [gendered hand, adorned with ring] is a photo-
         graph of [gendered naked torso], gagged
[generic human figure] infects computerized images with
           digitized viruses and then transfers them to canvas with
           a robotic device
                                                   [possible responses to what is seen
in [name of nation] at another time another set of reponses:
a [sexual category withheld] cuts hair and cameras circle
          around and [generic human pronoun] is dragged out of
          the room
another [generic human figure] says passionately we express
          ourselves in a language of regulations. Symbols and
          numbers best convey our ideas
another [generic human figure] makes an enormous painting
           of a massacre victim, mutilated and bloody, and hangs it
           by night on a pedestrian bridge
what a nation gives us is the image in [name of major weekly
          news source] of the [generic human figure] standing
          before the tanks with white flag
[generic pronoun] painted on houses, streets, stones, trees
[generic pronoun] covered [name of island] with strange marks
         in chalk, oil paint, and dye
[generic pronoun] wished to reduce writing to the zero level
         where it is without meaning. When culture invades
         private life on a large scale [generic pronoun] said the
         individual cannot escape being raped
another [generic noun] made a font that was scratched into
         paper by a knife
this font made each letter into a single scratch
[generic pronoun] scratched the other [generic pronoun]'s
         statement on rape into a banner and hung it outside
                                                       [my zero-level writing
                                                       [generic pronoun] said
                                                                           protest rape
                                                       [generic pronoun] said
                                                          my zero-level writing
                                                       [generic pronoun]  said
                                                       dangerous cultural rape
                                                       [generic pronoun]  said
                                                           my zero-level writing
                                                           my zero-level writing
                                                     V
a voice stutters in the background of our waking mind
[generic possessive pronoun] stutter is our stutter
or it is the way we define our difference?
                                                                                  stutter is nation
beneath an image of human figures the words [you have
          nothing to lose but your chains
                                           at times two voices talk to one another
                                                             [generic human] faces [tired]
we know we are all constructed
when it comes down to it we don't believe it
the social always holds us back
while the ways that we encounter relation are various
we remain
searching [searching
we question, respond
                                                              [deny we [move forward
                                  
 
~~~
The day turned into the city and the city turned into the mindand the moving trucks trumbled along like loud worries speaking overthe bicycle’s ideawhich wove between the more armored vehicles of expressionand over planks left by the construction workerson a holiday morning when no work was being donebecause no matter the day, we tend towards remaking parts of it—what we said or did, or how we looked—and the buildings were like faceslining the banks of a paradeobstructing and highlighting each otherdefining height and width for each otheroffsetting grace and functionlike Audrey Hepburn from Jesse Owens, and the hearty pigeons collaborate with wrought iron fencesand become recurring choruses of memoryreassembling around bencheswe sat in once, while seagulls wheel like immigrating thoughts, and never-leavingchickadees hop bared hedges and low treeslike commas and semicolons, landingwhere needed, separating subjects from adjectives, stringing alongthe long ideas, showing how the cagehas no door, and the lights changedso the tide of sound ebbed and returnedlike our own breathand when I knew everythingwas going to look the same as the mindI stopped at a lively cornerwhere the signs themselves were likeperpendicular dialects in conversation andI put both my feet on the groundtook the bag from the basketso pleased it had not been crushedby the mightiness of all elsethat goes on and gave you the sentence inside.
~~~
After the second conference, I would be cast in the role of a young dancer with a prestigious New York City ballet company. I would be cast in the role of the mother, a former dancer now amateur artist, whose career ended at 28 when she became pregnant. I would be cast in the role of the exotic beauty who is more in touch with her sensuality. I would be cast in the role of the director, a cruel and demanding genius who would sleep with the ingenue. I would be cast in the role of someone selected to compete for the part alongside several other dancers. I would be cast in the role of someone who bites the director, and/or doesn't get along with the other dancers. I would be cast in the role of the aging principal dancer. My rigid technique would make me the ideal choice, but I would also lack the passion required by this role.
I would practice all the time. I would become increasingly paranoid. I would get drunk and yell, with dark makeup all around my eyes. I would barricade myself in my room. I would become increasingly critical. I would tell her how pretty she is, and carefully pull mittens over her hands before bed so that she does not hurt herself. I would sing her a lullaby. I would see my own image everywhere. I would be annoyed with her. I would paint picture after picture of the person I loved and hated. I would get a rash. I would get into an accident. I would eat the cake offered to me, although I did not want it. I would injure myself. I would hallucinate that I am having sex with my friend, and during this scene there would be a ripping, chewing sound. The scene is obviously misogynist. But it felt so real. I would peel skin away from my fingernails in long strips. It would happen in the bathroom. My friend would perform my role in my absence. I would perform my friend's role in her absence. I would sleep with the director. I would wish to sleep with the director. I would be left alone in the building.
I would betray my friend. My friend would betray me. I would feel the envy and aggression of others keenly. I would feel envious and aggressive towards others. I would seem rather childish. I would be rigid and controlling. I would pass out. I would scratch my back until it bled, and wear clothing designed to cover these scratches. I would not be part of the group. I would discover her in my room, wearing my costume, I would congratulate her, kiss her, shove her into the mirror and hide her body. Only then would I notice my own wound. Crying as I watched her performance.
~~~
I open the box of my favorite postcards   
and turn them over looking for de Chirico   
because I remember seeing you standing   
facing a wall no wider than a column where   
to your left was a hall going straight back
into darkness, the floor a ramp sloping down   
to where you stood alone and where the room   
opened out on your right to an auditorium   
full of people who had just heard you read   
and were now listening to the other poet.   
I was looking for the de Chirico because of   
the places, the empty places. The word   
“boulevard” came to mind. Standing on the side   
of the fountains in Paris where the water   
blew onto me when I was fifteen. It was night.   
It was dark then too and I was alone.   
Why didn’t you find me? Why didn’t   
somebody find me all those years? The form   
of love was purity. An art. An architecture.   
Maybe a train. Maybe the shadow of a statue   
and the statue with its front turned away   
from me. Maybe one young girl playing alone,   
hearing even small sounds ring off cobblestones   
and the stone walls. I turn the cards looking   
for the one and come to Giacometti’s eyes   
full of caring and something remote.
His eyes are loving and empty, but not with   
nothingness, not for the usual reasons, but because   
he is working. The Rothko Chapel empty. A cheap   
statue of Sappho in the modern city of Mytilene   
and ancient sunlight. David Park’s four men   
with smudges for mouths, backed by water,   
each held still by the impossibility of what   
art can accomplish. A broken river god,
only the body. A girl playing with her rabbit in bed.   
The postcard of a summer lightning storm over Iowa.
~~~
To say screw them, to be screw-them
bent on one thing all but lost,
one music or mystery,
beyond all the necessary
incidental snaggings of the heart;
to train the whole soul’s beam
on a solitary hill, or on it
a special kind of rock or creeper;
to be sated just by saxophone;
to want nothing but your eyes
lifelong to study Scottish otters:
the snub, slippery-whiskered snout;
the way they intertwine in threes
at play, indistinguishably bound,
long sleek backs submerging away...
To make of this your being’s aim,
its joy, and know by pulse and viscus
the word joy. No gifts but thine
to thyself: thou canst, if thou list,
single out, make good, one wish.
This from the dumb lips of an old god
who with one endless, misty hand
holds out to us too much to love,
and with the other—crooked-fingered,
crazed with veins—some nights and days.
~~~
After Brion Gysin / William S. Burroughs



All writing around the sides the persons a galaxy all writing resounds a hot history. All writing is in fact cut-ups history will decide games heated and heated economic behavior. To rise up scene all sounds of Tahrir and inside supply side threatened. A long delineation. Longer than I would be counting. This, a whisper, this the end of whisper time. Rise up and wiser this the streets of the world. Commission overheard in spin a soldiering one. What streets of the world to spin rubric’s yes yes commerce, no, a no, no. Tanks of the blown-off world. He is my beautiful offshore a caw caw of major spills and elsewhere no, no. Cut the dialect the binary the dear word so precious and forbidden. They use the machines to take the streets of the world. Horizon my headwater cut cut the cable my beignets my else an appetite “poor politics, poor poor pols.” Waters of the world in media cut cut the lines manipulate desire and show the word show the Man show the tablets a Paleolithic grab all the twilight fields of discontent that shadow governments rise up people of the world of many wounded galaxies of discontent. And hear you, people of the word. What room? The gray we reach to. Assume that the worst has happened deporting Rom explicit in the gypsy purge meeting with Popes in the streets of the world. Subject to strategy poor poor pol a scrutiny. Its link its drill its Bandars. Condemn Salazar and the interior ministry of fisheries and assume the worst in writing cuts his exterior of life the glib industry, the selves behind the tyrants. My loaves and fishes in deep deep water. Is at some point classical prose, my no, Bulgaria my no Romania my Haiti my Egypt, and gypsy environment come to this coastline America ruptured pipeline to awe caw Gulf Stream is seated cut cut to other fields ripple effect and your domino will fall. And the bomb fall down. Cutting and rearranging factor your opponent your domino history will gain introducing a new parity binary Assange dimension your strategy. Will history decide “caw caw caw.” How many Rom yes yes discoveries sound to kinesthetic a gulf of everyone. She wanted to soldier a gulf of anyone. She wanted to soldier out of here her long delineation longer than would be counting. Cut through this leak of revolution the future will come out. We can deport Rimbaud now produce accident to his color “Voyelles.” Exit the colors you drain me of. And new dimension to films cut cut Sarkozy cut Hollande the senses the place of sands, gambling Rom scene all sounds all colors tasting sounds, France, France smell all streets of the world. Wake up, all colors of all the burqas tasting sounds of the shadow world. Cut cut when you can have the best all: Anthropocene. Welcome to the Anthropocene. Rom the gypsy in everyone. In a collage of words read heard decipher, Rom arise outbreak of military strategy, sound of voice a pitching wail will sear the wall will wall the sound will break the word will suck the variation clear and act accordingly history will decide the streets of the world. Caw caw introduced the cut-up scissored remembered gulf renders the aroma in memory of my despotic elders. Aroma of Rom. Let the dolphins in and act accordingly. If you posed entirely of prearranged cut cut determined by random leaders no Merkel cut cut G-20. A page of written words no advantage to leak from circular Salazar. Interior from knowing into writer predict the move the mood, no go back will step down will will step down. Circumpolar water and denizens within arise. Streets of the world arise. The cut variation images shift Rom sense advantage in processing to sound sight cut cut sound to arise. Visit of memories New Orleans Florida have been made by accidents is where Rimbaud was going with order could live could systematic derangement of the gambling scene, cut cut in with a tea party lullaby then hallucination: seeing and places that arise the streets of the word. A long line’s delineation to random future streets of the world. And they our nuclear future to deny deny. Our man in rendition and cut cut the torture oh streets of the world arise to cut back forms else mammals suffer a dead Mubarak. Rearrange blunt the word and image to other fields Rom, no France France rise to streets the USA the USA of the soldiering world. We’ll see how calm politics will become. G-20 outbreak of temper Germany. Of temper BP. Condemn the masters UK France corpse or carp on it but no longer predict the move, cut cut other fields than cuts your writing Egypt your Yemen your Syria your Libya your Mali.
~~~
From the point of view of all time, these recent changes signal more a return to nature than a departure, than degradation. In the beginning, after all, there was boiling rock. Then waters arranging their bodies around an era of softer forms: lichen, grassland, swaying treetops. Then creatures, movingly fleshed, treading pathways that hardened. Then pavement hardening and cities, monumental. Soon mostly rock again, and radiant. More and more like moon. Soon, sooner than is being thought, there will be even more light. The creatures will have stopped being able to move or be moved. And the rock will boil.
~~~
From golden showers of the ancient skies,
On the first day, and the eternal snow of stars,
You once unfastened giant calyxes
For the young earth still innocent of scars:
 
Young gladioli with the necks of swans,
Laurels divine, of exiled souls the dream,
Vermilion as the modesty of dawns
Trod by the footsteps of the seraphim;
 
The hyacinth, the myrtle gleaming bright,
And, like the flesh of woman, the cruel rose,
Hérodiade blooming in the garden light,
She that from wild and radiant blood arose!
 
And made the sobbing whiteness of the lily
That skims a sea of sighs, and as it wends
Through the blue incense of horizons, palely
Toward the weeping moon in dreams ascends!
 
Hosanna on the lute and in the censers,
Lady, and of our purgatorial groves!
Through heavenly evenings let the echoes answer,
Sparkling haloes, glances of rapturous love!
 
Mother, who in your strong and righteous bosom,
Formed calyxes balancing the future flask,
Capacious flowers with the deadly balsam
For the weary poet withering on the husk.
~~~
On Tyrone Geter’s “The Basket Maker #2”



Weave me closer
to you
with hands dyed indigo
that rake oyster beds
awake
Smell you long
before
I see you
Vanilla sweet
Sweetgrass weaving
wares that keep Yankees coming
on ferries, no bridge
Waters been troubled
Makes you wonder
who put the root on whom first
with doors dyed indigo
Pray the evil spirits away
at the praise house
Make John Hop to stave off John Deere
We migrants
fighting to stay put
Even nomads come home
for a Lowcountry boil
a feast for hungry
prodigal sons
and daughters
with hearts dyed indigo
Dying for you to
weave us closer
~~~
                                                                IPromises to keep was a lie, he had nothing. Through 
the woods. Over the river and into the pain. It is an addict's
talk of quitting as she's smacking at a vein. He was always
going into the woods. It was he who wrote, The best wayout is always through. You'd think a shrink, but no, a poet.
He saw the woods and knew. The forest is the one that holds
promises. The woods are lovely, dark, and deep, they fill 
with a quiet snow. Miles are traveled as we sleep. He steershis horse off the road. Among the trees now, the blizzard 
is a dusting. Holes in the canopy make columns of snowstorm, 
lit from above. His little horse thinks it is queer. They go
deeper, sky gets darker. It's the darkest night of the year.                                                              IIHe had no promises to keep, nothing pending. Had no bedto head to, measurably away in miles. He was a freak like me,monster of the dawn. Whose woods these are I think I know,his house is in the village though. In the middle of lifehe found himself lost in a dark woods. I discovered myselfin a somber forest. In between my breasts and breaths I gotlost. The woods are lovely, dark and deep. But I've got promisesto keep, smiles to go before I leap. I'm going into the woods.They're lovely dark, and deep, which is what I want, deep lovely darkness. No one has asked, let alone taken, a promise of me,no one will notice if I choose bed or rug, couch or forest deep. It doesn't matter where I sleep. It doesn't matter where I sleep.
~~~
(she opens the door)
(he is twelve inches
away) her fingers
still splayed across the
battened-down brass latch
of his sternum (she
closes the door) (he
is eight feet away)
her palm skids down the
banister clings to
the fluted globe of
the finial (he
is twenty-eight feet
away) (she opens
the door) the black air
is fast flowing and
cold (she closes the
door) she clutches her
thin intimacy
tight under her chin
and trips down the steps
(he is forty feet
away) the stiff wind
palpably stripping
his scent from her hair
from the numb fingers
she raises to her
mouth a cab pulls up
(she opens the door)
she bends the body
hitherto upright
(she closes the door)
the cracked brown vinyl
(he is ninety feet
away) biting the
backs of her thighs red
blotches suffusing
her cheeks I’m sorry
please stop she says (he
is four hundred feet
away) please stop the
cab (she opens the
door) the cab stops she
pushes a twenty
through the slot (he is
seven hundred feet
away) (she closes
the door) the husk of
something dry and light
falls to the sidewalk
crumbles away (she
opens the door) (he
is two feet away)
(she closes the door)
~~~
end- and be-any, make ends hour, at the end on my haze, elf’s well
that ends well, at a fair end, an end as itself, any good must come to
an end, tie is loose ends, end on the line, defanging on the end, end
as sight, coming to a man end, end as took, hour a terrible end, to
end on the ticks, team end, on the semiotics end, light at the end of
the tunnel, choking both ends, does the end justify the bound,
short end on the brand, know which end is is, now-end, toss-end,
you haven’t heard the end on it, follow me to the ends.
~~~
On “Sueño No. 5: Botella del mar,” a photograph by Grete Stern (1950)



The woman sits clutching her knees
inside a short-necked bottle on a beach,
looks up smiling at a mouth above
all imagined itineraries.
We like to think she volunteered
to be lowered into the bottle.
On her own idea, even
her own craftiness, lured into being
enrobed with the thick glass that is the gray-blue
of a ukiyo-e sky of flying cranes
who breathe the steam
of that bluish gray ideation and
end of autumn, or a plume of smoke
from a train in the middle distance.
Swells of warm seawater push wet sand against
spun tips of seashells that sit on the warmed strand
like nobility on a plush settee.
The bottle’s bottom edge lists in the hot
sand, the heat of the morning sunlight penetrates
the bottle walls, and foam and breeze coax
a juddering creature from underneath.
From inside the woman argues with herself that
the horizon is another of the world’s ambitions.
Those ships slipped into bottles
with volition and self-responsibility,
acquiesce so marvelously,
like the glass fitting
so smoothly around her. She is a person
born to be put into this and admired as perfection
from the outside, which is how we love flowers
and dreams, though our desires may suffocate them.
~~~
Because it changes O’Hare to o hate,
o hate, o hate — over and over, no matter
how many times I retype it. O hate, like
an American tune, an American fable
where, yo, you can enter an o hate
bathroom, take a selfie in the mirror
cuz your sister wants to see the pockets
of your Great American Rhinestone Jeans.
Because, on a street called Viewpoint,I get home becomes I get guns, off a road
on a mission to kill every squirrel-ish
pedestrian. Because he was packing,
concealed, threatening to use it, use
his hands or feet. My feet, iamb
of a son of a birch, of a brick chatting
with the devil, with God, with a listener
not listening. Because he’d gone bonnets,
his garden bounty a faded wine, his wife’s
linguine a longing for a golden ear,
so I took her to the botanical gardens
in my getaway car, to a fruit on a vine,
but the limes went lemur, the night to nonfat,
the clear to catastrophic. Because driving away
from the frog man croaking hypocrite,heavenly went down like a melting hedge,
a gal gone hog-tied, a fish crying, a tiger-
tiger togetherness, flight or fucked,
a heart, stroked, racing to its vicarious
carousel, a fungus lashed to a beam gone
beleaguered. Because he will kill her,
that’s his plan: to kill us all. Can’t commit
or commute, can’t debone his breath,
can’t take his acute paranoia, chalk it up
to cute. Because this here’s a Josie
madhouse, a bedroom bedrock-locked.
Because Blvd morphed to Bled, spirit
summoned with a Ouija board. Becausesoap holder went love hen, though love
had flown the Calycanthus
like the grilled portobellos messing
with his vowels. Please please, I pleaded
to the pleading day. Because prayer
is like a bread line, a penny for your
exploded mind. Because lots of logs
to you
~~~
In sympathy with Gaspara Stampa



By woman so touched, so pressed,
detachment being thought
achievable at all
 
is boggling in itself. Its being
thought achievable by love—but love
for only all (not someone’s single) sentience—
 
appears the precept of too cold
a form of flame. How much
of a hand in things
 
relinquishes the hold
of things-at-hand?
What kiss might such
 
a mind reclaim? A swirl of dust
in Buddhist schools, perhaps.
A view of several solar
 
systems from above.
Not love.
The thought
 
appeals as it appals:
Slow learners, we must spurn
the selving sensualities, to feel
 
for feelers of this kind,
unfasten passion’s burner
to identify what’s under it—
 
in short, must court
dispassion just
to be compassionate.
~~~
What sacramental hurt that brings
The terror of the truth of things
Had changed thee? Secret be it yet.
’T was thine, upon a headland set,
To view no isles of man’s delight,
With lyric foam in rainbow flight,
But all a-swing, a-gleam, mid slow uproar,
Black sea, and curved uncouth sea-bitten shore.
~~~
I am always hungry

& wanting to have

sex. This is a fact.

If you get right

down to it the new

unprocessed peanut

butter is no damn

good & you should

buy it in a jar as

always in the

largest supermarket

you know. And

I am an enemy

of change, as

you know. All

the things I

embrace as new

are in

fact old things,

re-released: swimming,

the sensation of

being dirty in

body and mind

summer as a

time to do

nothing and make

no money. Prayer

as a last re-

sort. Pleasure

as a means,

and then a

means again

with no ends

in sight. I am

absolutely in opposition

to all kinds of

goals. I have

no desire to know           

where this, anything

is getting me.

When the water

boils I get

a cup of tea.

Accidentally I

read all the

works of Proust.

It was summer

I was there

so was he. I

write because

I would like

to be used for

years after

my death. Not

only my body

will be compost

but the thoughts

I left during

my life. During

my life I was

a woman with

hazel eyes. Out

the window

is a crooked

silo. Parts

of your

body I think

of as stripes

which I have

learned to

love along. We

swim naked

in ponds &

I write be-

hind your

back. My thoughts

about you are

not exactly

forbidden, but

exalted because

they are useless,

not intended

to get you

because I have

you & you love

me. It’s more

like a playground

where I play

with my reflection

of you until

you come back

and into the

real you I

get to sink

my teeth. With

you I know how

to relax. &

so I work

behind your

back. Which

is lovely.

Nature

is out of control

you tell me &

that’s what’s so

good about

it. I’m immoderately

in love with you,

knocked out by

all your new

white hair

 

why shouldn’t

something

I have always

known be the

very best there

is. I love

you from my

childhood,

starting back

there when

one day was

just like the

rest, random

growth and

breezes, constant

love, a sand-

wich in the

middle of

day,

a tiny step

in the vastly

conventional

path of

the Sun. I

squint. I

wink. I

take the

ride.
~~~
Some claim the origin of songwas a war cry some say it was a rhymetelling the farmers when to plant and reapdon’t they know the first song was a lullabypulled from a mother’s sleepsaid the old womanA significantfactor generating my delight in beingalive this springtimeis the birdsong that like a sweeping mesh has captured melike diamond rain I can’thear it enough said the tuliplifetime after lifetimewe surged up the hillI and my dear brothersthirsty for bloodutteringour beautiful songssaid the dog
~~~
and then there are the one-hit zombies
cursed to an eternity of Monday nights
who runs our music does not make it
controls manufacture and marketing of rhythm
schemes on and fixes the charts. it’s polyphonic
from the dark of the chitlin to solid gold dawn
doublecrossed over
a love come down
after the plunge
sloshing around in limbo
that too sweet gospel splash
~~~
II. Conversion I like to be stationary.                      —Bartleby
Who is not a wild Enthusiast   
in a green meadow   
furious and fell
Arriving on the stage of history   
I saw madness of the world
Stripped of falsification   
and corruption
anthems were singing in Authorem
Father and the Father
by my words will I be justified
Autobiography I saw
Legal righteousness makes us servants   
All good hearers
Opposers or despisers
Night page torn word missing
The family silence   
gave up the ghost
I feared the fall of my child   
resting quietly with some hopes   
as a bird before any
Election—Vocation—
Justification—
Cape of Wind wreathe   
fame out laughing   
Seated on a cloud   
Seacret drift
seacretly behest   
the dear She
comes to all Guilty   
all circling
Eye window soul body   
Pride cannot bow   
Ariadne’s diadem   
zodiac helmet belt
~~~
The tea-kettle bubbled, the tea things were set, The candles were lighted, the ladies were met; The how d’ye’s were over, and entering bustle, The company seated, and silks ceased to rustle: The great Mrs. Consequence opened her fan, And thus the discourse in an instant began (All affected reserve and formality scorning): “I suppose you all saw in the paper this morning A volume of Poems advertised—’tis said They’re produced by the pen of a poor servant-maid.” “A servant write verses!” says Madam Du Bloom: “Pray what is the subject—a Mop, or a Broom?” “He, he, he,” says Miss Flounce: “I suppose we shall see An ode on a Dishclout—what else can it be?” Says Miss Coquettilla, “Why, ladies, so tart? Perhaps Tom the footman has fired her heart; And she’ll tell us how charming he looks in new clothes, And how nimble his hand moves in brushing the shoes; Or how, the last time that he went to May Fair, He bought her some sweethearts of gingerbread ware.” “For my part I think,” says old Lady Marr-joy, “A servant might find herself other employ: Was she mine I’d employ her as long as ’twas light, And send her to bed without candle at night.” “Why so?” says Miss Rhymer, displeased: “I protest ’Tis pity a genius should be so depressed!” “What ideas can such low-bred creatures conceive?” Says Mrs. Noworthy, and laughed in her sleeve. Says old Miss Prudella, “If servants can tell How to write to their mothers, to say they are well, And read of a Sunday The Duty of Man, Which is more I believe than one half of them can; I think ’tis much properer they should rest there, Than be reaching at things so much out of their sphere.” Says old Mrs. Candour, “I’ve now got a maid That’s the plague of my life—a young gossiping jade; There’s no end of the people that after her come, And whenever I’m out, she is never at home; I’d rather ten times she would sit down and write, Than gossip all over the town every night.” “Some whimsical trollop most like,” says Miss Prim, “Has been scribbling of nonsense, just out of a whim, And, conscious it neither is witty nor pretty, Conceals her true name, and ascribes it to Betty.” “I once had a servant myself,” says Miss Pines, “That wrote on a wedding some very good lines.” Says Mrs. Domestic, “And when they were done, I can’t see for my part what use they were on; Had she wrote a receipt, to’ve instructed you how To warm a cold breast of veal, like a ragout, Or to make cowslip wine, that would pass for Champagne, It might have been useful, again and again.” On the sofa was old Lady Pedigree placed; She owned that for poetry she had no taste, That the study of heraldry was more in fashion, And boasted she knew all the crests in the nation. Says Mrs. Routella, “Tom, take out the urn, And stir up the fire, you see it don’t burn.”    The tea-things removed, and the tea-table gone, The card-tables brought, and the cards laid thereon, The ladies, ambitious for each other’s crown, Like courtiers contending for honours, sat down.
~~~
         1
Held between wars
my lifetime
                  among wars, the big hands of the world of death
my lifetime
listens to yours.
The faces of the sufferers
in the street, in dailiness,
their lives showing
through their bodies
a look as of music
the revolutionary look
that says    I am in the world
to change the world
my lifetime
is to love to endure to suffer the music
to set its portrait
up as a sheet of the world
the most moving the most alive
Easter and bone
and Faust walking among flowers of the world
and the child alive within the living woman, music of man,
and death holding my lifetime between great hands
the hands of enduring life
that suffers the gifts and madness of full life, on earth, in
         our time,
and through my life, through my eyes, through my arms
        and hands
may give the face of this music in portrait waiting for
the unknown person
held in the two hands, you.
         2
Woman as gates, saying:
"The process is after all like music,
like the development of a piece of music.
The fugues come back and
                                               again and again
interweave.
A theme may seem to have been put aside,
but it keeps returning—
the same thing modulated,
somewhat changed in form.
Usually richer.
And it is very good that this is so."
A woman pouring her opposites.
"After all there are happy things in life too.
Why do you show only the dark side?"
"I could not answer this. But I know—
in the beginning my impulse to know
the working life
                              had little to do with
pity or sympathy.
                               I simply felt
that the life of the workers was beautiful."
She said, "I am groping in the dark."
She said, "When the door opens, of sensuality,
then you will understand it too. The struggle begins.
Never again to be free of it,
often you will feel it to be your enemy.
Sometimes
you will almost suffocate,
such joy it brings."
Saying of her husband: "My wish
is to die after Karl.
I know no person who can love as he can,
with his whole soul.
But often too it has made me
so terribly happy."
She said: "We rowed over to Carrara at dawn,
climbed up to the marble quarries
and rowed back at night. The drops of water
fell like guttering stars
from our oars."
She said: "As a matter of fact,
I believe
                that bisexuality
is almost    a necessary factor
in artistic production; at any rate,
the tinge of masculinity within me
helped me
                  in my work."
She said: "The only technique I can still manage.
It's hardly a technique at all, lithography.
In it
        only the essentials count."
A tight-lipped man in a restaurant last night saying to me:
"Kollwitz?     She's too black-and-white."
         3
Held among wars, watching
     all of them
     all these people
     weavers,
     Carmagnole
Looking at
     all of them
     death, the children
     patients in waiting-rooms
     famine
     the street
A woman seeing
     the violent, inexorable
     movement of nakedness
     and the confession of No
     the confession of great weakness, war,
     all streaming to one son killed, Peter;
     even the son left living; repeated,
     the father, the mother; the grandson
     another Peter killed in another war; firestorm;
     dark, light, as two hands,
     this pole and that pole as the gates.
What would happen if one woman told the truth about
        her life?
     The world would split open
         4   Song : The Calling-Up 
Rumor, stir of ripeness
rising within this girl
sensual blossoming
of meaning, its light and form.
The birth-cry summoning
out of the male, the father
from the warm woman
a mother in response.
The word of death
calls up the fight with stone
wrestle with grief with time
from the material make
an art harder than bronze.
         5   Self-Portrait 
Mouth looking directly at you
eyes in their inwardness looking
directly at you
half light    half darkness
woman, strong, German, young artist
flows into
wide sensual mouth meditating
looking right at you
eyes shadowed with brave hand
looking deep at you
flows into
wounded brave mouth
grieving and hooded eyes
alive, German, in her first War
flows into
strength of the worn face
a skein of lines
broods, flows into
mothers among the war graves
bent over death
facing the father
stubborn upon the field
flows into
the marks of her knowing—Nie Wieder Krieg
repeated in the eyes
flows into
"Seedcorn must not be ground"
and the grooved cheek
lips drawn fine
the down-drawn grief
face of our age
flows intoPieta, mother and
between her knees
life as her son in death
pouring from the sky of
one more war
flows into
face almost obliterated
hand over the mouth forever
hand over one eye now
the other great eye
closed
~~~
The first sentence is a sentence about writing. The second sentence tells you it's alright to lose interest. You might be one of those people who sits back in his or her chair without interest, and this would have been the third sentence you would have read. The fourth sentence, what does that say, that says something about how I genuinely feel, even if it no longer matters how I genuinely feel, that has not even become the topic of another book. The fifth sentence says that that was left by the wayside because it was such a variable thing. That's what the sixth sentence said, and says, that it sits there still, varying, changing its colors, etc., the army of ancient Rome marches by, they think it is some sort of tomb and display their eagle insignia. The seventh sentence ill conceals its surprise that I should have tried to make it all look so far away. The eight sentence is therefore a meditation on something close at hand. The ninth sentence is a means of approach. In the tenth sentence I discover I am staring at a list of things I have done written in blue pencil on brown paper. In the eleventh sentence I draw a one-eyed duck on the paper beside the list. In the twelfth sentence I circle one of the numbers on the list and I start to feel nervous. In the thirteenth sentence I realize I have chosen something. In the fourteenth sentence I decide I will read my choice aloud. In the fifteenth sentence I stall by saying the words "I don't have a choice." In the sixteenth sentence I stall again by thinking about the obelisk on the Upper East Side in Central Park and how it is called "Cleopatra's Needle," and how around the base of the "needle" there are metal supports in the shape of crustaceans, I think they are crabs in fact but sometimes that word is slightly obscene so I consider not writing it. In the seventeenth sentence I think some more about the kinds of joke that employ that word and whether it is worth thinking about such jokes, as it does alter the genre of what you are writing if such things are allowed to be thought as a part of it. The lawns of the park were very green in summer, and it is early summer right now, right as I think to think this, and this is the first time I have lived in New York City for a full year in ten years, this is what I tell as the nineteenth sentence. In the twentieth sentence I recall the list and resolve again to look at it. In the twentifirst sentence I misspell twenty-first with two "i"s. In the twenty-second sentence I look down at the list, I have circled no. 18759351 on the list. In the twentisecond sentence I misspell twenty-second using an "i" again. In the twenty-third sentence I read what is written next to no. 18759351, it says, "He was sitting on a bench...," but at this moment a breeze enters in through the open window, lifting the page and you begin reading another line, the words, "And you hand in the application and it takes three months and...." In the twenty-fourth sentence you can see me set the page down as another person walks through the door. I turn off the electronic typewriter and scroll out the page and place it facedown on the desk and I cover it with a notebook you weren't aware was also there on the desk. Now you can see it, it is almost the exact same color as the surface of the desk and now you can see it. These were the twenty-fifth and twenty-sixth sentences, respectively, it is the lot of the twenty-seventh sentence to have to announce that. In the twenty-eighth sentence a cloud passes over the apartment on its way into space. In the twenty-ninth sentence, I think, next year this will be the number of my age. The thirtieth sentence is all about the speed at which time is passing. In the thirty-first sentence I won't care anymore, I'll see that reality only accrues to itself and does not have to mean something. In the thirty-second sentence I want you to agree with me. Things happen by chance, and what Montaigne pleads with us to believe, in an essay, is that fortune makes herself known in the act of reading, there is much that I could not have intended which is yet here, I forget exactly how this goes, this being the thirty-third sentence. I sit down beside myself in the thirty-fourth sentence and say to myself, smiling, even small numbers are big. This is the working of time, the thirty-fifth sentence joins in saying this, too, once one has crossed the years their number does not matter. But what I was trying to get across was, I think in sentence thirty-six, that maybe you could not have done things earlier, maybe it just was not possible in those days for whichever reasons. You spend the thirty-seventh sentence attempting to spell those reasons out. You fall asleep, and in the thirty-eighth sentence you dream about a room. The room is a classroom in which you are alone, says sentence number thirty-nine, the windows have been left open and a sentence can be read on the blackboard. In the fortieth sentence you have to force yourself to go on. Descartes's dream, you remember, in sentence forty-one, provided a quote supposedly from Ausonius. This is the forty-second sentence, Est et non. Then I think it is safe to say that something begins to happen, sentence forty-three tells us. Sentence forty-four says that you should forgive. Sentence forty-five says that you remember this number as having been particularly beautiful when worn by your mother. Sentence forty-six says the figures move away. Sentence forty-seven is a sentence about what loneliness names itself in the paradoxical presence of others. Sentence forty-eight says it has a name. Sentence forty-nine says that I cannot remember this name. Sentence fifty says that I go back and try and live there in that moment when I was saying the name. I say, "Happiness." This was sentence fifty-one. That was sentence fifty-two. Sentence fifty-four is a sentence about how there is too much of so many things, there is too much of all the words, but the world runs on underneath them and I keep on imagining how you could have heard me, how you could not have heard me. Sentence fifty-five is a sentence about picking up the phone. Sentence fifty-six is a sentence about picking up a small cellular phone but not using it and willing the phone to ring on its own. The gray cotton of the sweatshirt I wear is a warm cotton in sentence fifty-seven. In sentence fifty-eight I decide to keep on saying the numbers. In sentence fifty-nine I hold the page up to the light and see the type on the other side show through, In sentence sixty you start to believe me. In sentence sixty-one I start to go back to the beginning. I wonder if I should worry. The world is full of pauses, the world is full with continuations, says sentence sixty-three. I let sentence sixty-four go. In sentence sixty-five it occurs to me that I concern myself here with something that ought not to be touched. Sentence sixty-six is a guess that this is the mystery of counting, that it goes on and means itself without having a meaning. I count the people in the distance I can see from my window in sentence sixty-seven. In sentence sixty-eight the breeze has a sweet smell. In sentence sixty-nine, it turns the last week of May in the year 2008. Sentence seventy concerns the lack of what I wanted, in my own mind, to be saying. In sentence seventy-one I'm going so far as to ask you if you can see this, how much of what I thought lay before me remained in the distance. In sentence seventy-two there is a hill there. In sentence seventy-three we see flowers open their faces and then black snakes slide down the face of the hill. In sentence seventy-four there is still nothing. In sentence seventy-five the moon changes place with the sun. In sentence seventy-six this takes place again, only now it is day. In sentence seventy-seven it is still day. In sentence seventy-eight it is still day. Why do you think about tragedy, sentence seventy-nine wants to know, since it is the least likely thing to happen. Sentence eighty will eventually come to me and want to know what I am doing with myself. Sentence eighty-one reminds me to expect this question. In sentence eighty-two something changes. I stay up two nights running and in the morning the sidewalk seems to rise up and meet my feet underneath my feet. Sentence eighty-four contains the question, didn't you already know that this would start to happen. Sentence eighty-five agrees. When I start to read sentence eighty-six I discover it contains the words, It is also true that what you said could be. For this reason, sentence eighty-seven is a sentence about why there are certainly points of correspondence between what we expect to be the case and what is. Sentence eighty-eight proclaims it feels the excitement and not the work. Sentence eighty-nine takes action without saying anything first. In sentence ninety I cover my eyes. In sentence ninety-one I uncover my eyes so that I can look again. In sentence ninety-two I cover them again. Now I am speaking to you. Now I am speaking to you. Say the words after me just as I say them. What it means to live is the subject of sentence ninety-six. You are moving out of earshot now. We are not going to miss each other. You have an excellent memory. Please never forget I was the one who told you that
~~~
Oh, I would have these tongues oracular Dip into silence, tease no more, let be! They madden, like some choral of the free Gusty and sweet against a prison-bar. To earth the boast that her gold empires are, The menace of delicious death to me, Great Undesign, strong as by God’s decree, Piercing the heart with beauty from afar! Music too winning to the sense forlorn! Of what angelic lineage was she born, Bred in what rapture?—These her sires and friends: Censure, Denial, Gloom, and Hunger’s throe. Praised be the Spirit that thro’ thee, Schubert! so Wrests evil unto wholly heavenly ends.
~~~
But then there comes that moment rare
When, for no cause that I can find,
The little voices of the air
Sound above all the sea and wind.
The sea and wind do then obey
And sighing, sighing double notes
Of double basses, content to play
A droning chord for the little throats—
The little throats that sing and rise
Up into the light with lovely ease
And a kind of magical, sweet surprise
To hear and know themselves for these—
For these little voices: the bee, the fly,
The leaf that taps, the pod that breaks,
The breeze on the grass-tops bending by,
The shrill quick sound that the insect makes.
~~~
On reading Susanne K. Langer’s Mind



If  leaf-trash chokes the stream-bed,reach for rock-bottom as you rakethe muck out. Let it slump dank,and dry fading, flat above the bank.Stand back. Watch the water vault ahead.Its thrust sweeps the surface clean, shores the debris,as it debrides its stone path to the lake,clarity carrying clarity.To see clear, resist the drag of  images.Take nature as it is, not Dame nor Kind.Act in events; touch what you name. Abhoreasy obverts of natural metaphor.Let human speech breathe out its best poor bridgesfrom mind to world, mind to self, mind to mind.Yet, I admit the event of the wood thrush:     In a footnote Langer (her book rapids-clean     like the spring-water aired over sleeked rock)     says she witnessed an August bird in shock     when a hawk snatched its mate. It perched, rushed     notes fluting two life-quotas in one flood,     its lungs pushing its voice, flushing the keen     calls, pumped out as the heart pumps blood,     not in twilight or warning but noon & wrong,     its old notes whistled too fast but accurate.I read this drenched in bird-panic, its spine-fusing loss all song, all loss; that loss mineawash in unanswered unanswered song.And I cannot claim we are not desolate.
~~~
“painting has no air . . .”
          —Gertrude Stein



That there should never be air
in a picture surprises me.
It would seem to be only a picture
of a certain kind, a portrait in paper
or glue, somewhere a stickiness
as opposed to a stick-to-it-ness
of another genre. It might be
quite new to do without
that air, or to find oxygen
on the landscape line
like a boat which is an object
or a shoe which never floats
and is stationary.
                              Still there
are certain illnesses that require
air, lots of it. And there are nervous
people who cannot manufacture
enough air and must seek
for it when they don’t have plants,
in pictures. There is the mysterious
traveling that one does outside
the cube and this takes place
in air.
                              It is why one develops
an attitude toward roses picked
in the morning air, even roses
without sun shining on them.
The roses of Juan Gris from which
we learn the selflessness of roses
existing perpetually without air,
the lid being down, so to speak,
a 1912 fragrance sifting
to the left corner where we read
“La Merveille” and escape.
~~~
Terrible are the rose names ...    
Stakeholders in a tradition of
“Grande Amore” and “True Love”
(one carmine, the other blush ... ), their aims
are, for the most part, scattershot.
“Mothersday” and “Playboy,”
“Senior Prom” and “Let’s Enjoy”
vie with a lyrical “Lady of Shalott,”
while a flyweight “Pink Knockout”
comes “Outta the Blue” to mock
“Honey Perfume,” “Pillow Talk”
— jock Cupid wielding clout.
Then maybe a puckish curator
pairs “Las Vegas” with “Nearly Wild,”
“Buttercream” with “Julia Child,”
“Aloha” with “Hello, Neighbor ... ”
 
 • 
Misenus, son of Aeolus, god of the wind,
don’t you think it’s bad form
to practice trumpet on this platform,
what with the dentistry squeal
at construction site decibel levels
of braking blade shaving molar steel,
dropped-in blare of delays and arrivals
squelched against granite, at close intervals,
while you riff on “Over the Rainbow” — ?
You received some negative attention
from Triton, after blowing his conch so loud
you inadvertently entered yourself
in an unwinnable contest; now,
stuck in a twenty-first-century translation
of hell, you press the stops, and for an obol
prepare our burial in an infinite axial scroll
with a tinier and tinier turning radius,
as if we were those hordes, the unsanctified,
who shoved one another along the Cocytus,
none led on to the golden bough
by Venus’s semaphore, the unloved rock doves,
whom Virgil treats so gently in the Aeneid.
~~~
A physician of eminence, some years ago,
 Was called in, to attend on a lady of fashion,Who had long been admired — and the toast of each beau,
 Tho’ now, her sunk features excited compassion.The doctor no sooner the lady had eyed,
 Than he begged, ‘She for once would his freedom forgiveIf he stepped from the rules of good breeding aside,
 To mention the terms on which she might live.’‘By all means,’ cried the lady, ‘for surely no word
 A physician may utter, should e’er give offence;Punctilio, in illness, is always absurd,
 And shows either doctor, or patient wants sense.’‘Why then, my dear lady, I cannot resist
 Pronouncing this truth, like a plain honest man;That if, in the use of white paint you persist
 No medicine will save you, do all that I can.’‘You astonish me, Doctor! but, such is my case,
 That I may as well die, as leave painting alone;For, should I appear with my natural face   Amongst my acquaintance — I should not be known.’
~~~
Only open homes & woods & pansies’ blue ledges
can lead the zero with his only arms
to embrace himself in open fields for all to gape upon.
He unbuttons steel-gray sheets, a knotted top coat,
bares himself, his hole, a vision
as framed by the marker that is
where
his body blew and left enclosure intact,
skeletal innards
enough to make moviegoers ask,
“Has anyone finished themselves yet?”
I haven’t. I swim the lagoon, take note:
the babies are barely dirty,
their armpits smooth with silky soot
weighted in apartment cycles like
we keep movement in boxes for thunderstorms,
and the railroad leaves a dancing behavior
absorbed by every second thought,
escaping the socket that was his mission,
his body incomplete, to help us
to the maidenhead of Niagara,
a target awakening
the chlorophyll of trees,
their tongues the densest forest
canopy and floor
thigh deep with root rot we sleep on and fold
into growing-whole sheep what becomes of the lot:
night’s zero hour
of what is & what isn’t, till death, not us part.
~~~
                                              Aztec girl twisting her hair into a braid
                                              when the army arrives.
She sees them in her citadel,
her nickname for the city
                                              forgotten by her mouth’s mind.
The Spanish writer who keeps the oldest codex saw grief
when the papers of the people’s prayers were burned by the soldiers.
Havoc, my freedom, without a history I invent my own.
Say I am of many faces,
neither white nor brown,
                                                                            say violet,
                             the color that speaks like violence.
Legacy sounds like lost at sea.
              Say it wasn’t precious to me, identity.
              Strange, dangerous innocence.
              The earth is an onion strung with lights, my eyes sting
                                                                                          from the blaze.
A gold hawk joins
              the ring of fox in heavy dew around me early and I
am part of their wet ritual in my wish
                                                            to turn from what is human, even
knowing it was hawk who stole the woodpecker’s redheaded flight.
~~~
Once upon a time
I caught a little rhyme
I set it on the floor
but it ran right out the door
I chased it on my bicycle
but it melted to an icicle
I scooped it up in my hat
but it turned into a cat
I caught it by the tail
but it stretched into a whale
I followed it in a boat
but it changed into a goat
When I fed it tin and paper
it became a tall skyscraper
Then it grew into a kite
and flew far out of sight ...
~~~
These be two
Country women.
What a size!
Great big arms
And round red faces;
Big substantial
Sit down places;
Great big bosoms firm as cheese
Bursting through their country jackets;
Wide big laps
And sturdy knees;
Hands outspread,
Round and rosy,
Hands to hold
A country posy
Or a baby or a lamb—
      And such eyes!
Stupid, shifty, small and sly
Peeping through a slit of sty,
Squinting through their neighbours’ plackets.
~~~
When one thing is becoming another, when writing is morphing, when the writing of an hour becomes the desire to write at all hours and into the night, fueled on caffeine or wine and desiring instruments of writing; typewriters, even a nib and ink well, and considering all the ways of stretching a space, digital or hard copy; hard copy, an ugly expression for printed matter, and for that matter, printed matter is efficient but lacks beauty. Page, a soft and elongated word; page, an extension at the end of my fingers; page, a screen that holds dreams and desires; the page of legal document that bind. The page is a promise. I read all sides, turning the page counterclockwise and turning the page over for what I may have missed.
Desire is a stick for scratching words into the dirt and for chiseling stone until the words become solid. The pen is a body, an anatomy, not an earthworm with indecipherable ends; the pen has a head and tail, and inky guts. And the brain of the pen belongs to the maker of marks.
later hours/another hour/late hours/early hours/happy hour/visiting hours.
All the elements of the dying hour surround my laptop, in the dying blades of cut grass and in the dying battery. Finches continue their making of a nest of twigs and grasses, but I know the nest is early paper, the raw ingredients and pulp. I know the world is a page turner, a paper globe, and I know that the birds are the great writers of the sky.
~~~
on seventeen, I come from hearty straw.My grandpa wore a gallonhat. My grandma, like a shogun,bun and shawl. For their honeymoon,they went to the movies. No oneknows what they saw.You arrive with licorice, cigarettes,the documentary on Woody Allen.Don’t feign a passion for his startin tv, or his clarinets,or Love and Death. Just skip to the Soon-Yi part.
~~~
Yes, nonsense is a treasure!   I love it from my heart; The only earthly pleasure    That never will depart. But, as for stupid reason,     That stalking, ten-foot rule, She’s always out of season,     A tedious, testy fool. She’s like a walking steeple,     With a clock for face and eyes, Still bawling to all people,    Time bids us to be wise. While nonsense on the spire     A weathercock you’ll find, Than reason soaring higher,     And changing with the wind. The clock too oft deceives,     Says what it cannot prove; While every one believes     The vane that turns above. Reason oft speaks unbidden,     And chides us to our face; For which she should be chidden,     And taught to know her place. While nonsense smiles and chatters,     And says such charming things, Like youthful hope she flatters;     And like a syren sings. Her charm’s from fancy borrowed,     For she is fancy’s pet; Her name is on her forehead,     In rainbow colors set. Then, nonsense let us cherish,     Far, far from reason’s light; Lest in her light she perish,    And vanish from our sight.
~~~
If honor to an ancient name be due, Or riches challenge it for one that’s new, The British language claims in either sense Both for its age, and for its opulence. But all great things must be from us removed, To be with higher reverence beloved. So landskips which in prospects distant lie, With greater wonder draw the pleasèd eye. Is not great Troy to one dark ruin hurled? Once the fam’d scene of all fighting world. Where’s Athens now, to whom Rome learning owes, And the safe laurels that adorned her brows? A strange reverse of fate she did endure, Never once greater, than she’s now obscure. Even Rome her self can but some footsteps show Of Scipio’s times, or those of Cicero. And as the Roman and the Grecian state, The British fell, the spoil of time and fate. But though the language hath the beauty lost, Yet she has still some great remains to boast. For ’twas in that, the sacred bards of old, In deathless numbers did their thoughts unfold. In groves, by rivers, and on fertile plains, They civilized and taught the listening swains; Whilst with high raptures, and as great success, Virtue they clothed in music’s charming dress. This Merlin spoke, who in his gloomy cave, Even Destiny her self seemed to enslave. For to his sight the future time was known, Much better than to others is their own; And with such state, predictions from him fell, As if he did decree, and not foretell. This spoke King Arthur, who, if fame be true, Could have compelled mankind to speak it too. In this once Boadicca valor taught, And spoke more nobly than her soldiers fought: Tell me what hero could be more than she, Who fell at once for fame and liberty? Nor could a greater sacrifice belong, Or to her children’s, or her country’s wrong. This spoke Caractacus, who was so brave, That to the Roman fortune check he gave: And when their yoke he could decline no more, He it so decently and nobly wore, That Rome her self with blushes did believe, A Britain would the law of honor give; And hastily his chains away she threw, Lest her own captive else should her subdue.
~~~
for Fabbio Doplicher



We were supposed to do a job in Italy
and, full of our feeling for
ourselves (our sense of being
Poets from America) we went
from Rome to Fano, met
the mayor, mulled
a couple matters over (what's
a cheap date, they asked us; what's
flat drink). Among Italian literati
we could recognize our counterparts:
the academic, the apologist,
the arrogant, the amorous,
the brazen and the glib—and there was one
administrator (the conservative), in suit
of regulation gray, who like a good tour guide
with measured pace and uninflected tone narrated
sights and histories the hired van hauled us past.
Of all, he was the most politic and least poetic,
so it seemed. Our last few days in Rome
(when all but three of the New World Bards had flown)
I found a book of poems this
unprepossessing one had written: it was there
in the pensione room (a room he'd recommended)
where it must have been abandoned by
the German visitor (was there a bus of them?)
to whom he had inscribed and dated it a month before.
I couldn't read Italian, either, so I put the book
back into the wardrobe's dark. We last Americans
were due to leave tomorrow. For our parting evening then
our host chose something in a family restaurant, and there
we sat and chatted, sat and chewed,
till, sensible it was our last
big chance to be poetic, make
our mark, one of us asked
                                             "What's poetry?"
Is it the fruits and vegetables and
marketplace of Campo dei Fiori, or
the statue there?" Because I was
the glib one, I identified the answer
instantly, I didn't have to think—"The truth
is both, it's both," I blurted out. But that
was easy. That was easiest to say. What followed
taught me something about difficulty,
for our underestimated host spoke out,
all of a sudden, with a rising passion, and he said:
The statue represents Giordano Bruno,
brought to be burned in the public square
because of his offense against
authority, which is to say
the Church. His crime was his belief
the universe does not revolve around
the human being: God is no
fixed point or central government, but rather is
poured in waves through all things. All things
move. "If God is not the soul itself, He is
the soul of the soul of the world." Such was
his heresy. The day they brought him
forth to die, they feared he might
incite the crowd (the man was famous
for his eloquence). And so his captors
placed upon his face
an iron mask, in which
he could not speak. That's
how they burned him. That is how
he died: without a word, in front
of everyone.
                     And poetry—
                                        (we'd all
put down our forks by now, to listen to
the man in gray; he went on
softly)—
                  poetry is what
he thought, but did not say.
~~~
                      The rhinestone lights blink off and on.
Pretend stars.
I'm sick of explanations. A life is like Russell said
of electricity, not a thing but the way things behave.
A science of motion toward some flat surface,
some heat, some cold. Some light
can leave some after-image but it doesn't last.
Isn't that what they say? That and that
historical events exchange glances with nothingness.
~~~
Because of the first, the fear of wreck,which they taught us to fear (though we learnedat once, and easily), 
                                    because of the wreckthat was expected (and metal given velocity and heft to assure it)—
                                          we became adepts inrise above: how many versions: the churchsteeple that took the eye straight up toheaven (though it seemed snagged onthe cross-beam of that cross, torn blueat the top, where sense leaked out). And rise above, transcendence, on that higherplane, the vertical direction of virtue (a bonyfinger pointing up to where matter dissolvesinto distaste for it);
                                   the space program, expensivetons of rocket (soon to be debris) fired offthe planet's crust at anything out there, pockedmoon, red rocky Mars, ever the upward urge, carved in the marble arch of the old librarydoor under which generations passed,hoping to rise above it all—like the woman the magician levitatesover the table, her body floating an unlikelyinch or two above the velvet-draped plateau...watch her hovering, weightless,
                                                        the crowd staringin wonder, the trick of the thing still hidden, and the magician doing something nowwith his hands, a flurry of brilliantsilk in the air, as she floats in the endlessness of art, 
                                           the magicianstill waving his scarves, the air a brightshatter of wings, doves from a hat,our disbelief suspended,while below, the wrecks accumulate: scrap yard, broken concrete slabs, andall those bodies not exempt from gravity,beneath our notice as we rideabove it all, like froth on a wavethat will be water falling by the ton,soon, when the tide turns.
~~~
In the past we listened to photographs. They heard our voice speak.
Alive, active. What had been distance was memory.    Dusk came,
Pushed us forward,   emptying the laboratory   each night undisturbed by
Erasure.
      In the city of X, they lived together. Always morose, her lips
soothed him. The piano was arranged in the old manner, light entered the
window, street lamps at the single tree.
      Emotion evoked by a single light on a subject is not transferable to
photographs of the improved city. The camera, once
commented freely amid rivering and lost gutters of treeless parks or avenue.
The old camera refused to penetrate the unknown. Its heart was soft,
unreliable.
      Now distributed is photography of new government building. We are
forbidden to observe despair silent in old photographs.
~~~
I was so happy in the gem room.
The sun was president, I was just
dug up, all hell had shrunk
to a sulphur crystal. Something danced
on the point; it must have been me.
I had a hundred faces, and one of them
served up the ceiling in a perfect slice — 
like a twelve-year-old saint
in some countryside where they only
read Revelation. I had some small
nugget of sense, for once, I was a mind
that understood the light    ...    
Rain rained in my aquamarine.
The world’s knuckles gripped the bedstead.
I felt the red dynamiting of me in Missouri,
where all outdoors was my candy store,
where color sucked at its all-day self
and never became less sweet, less
new. “I want to put it in my mouth,”
said someone, “I almost want to eat it    ...    ”
I had dozens of uses, but I was mostly
flat beautiful. Visitors just gasped
in the matte-black room where I freely
fluoresced. They saw me laid on a dictionary
to demonstrate my transparency,
which was complete; they could read the wordeverything through me.
My name meant blood, meant seawater,
meant lemon. The eye in my agate
never blinked. I was believed to be formed
of frozen moonlight. I was cut so that a star
shone back. The purest and wind-clearest
hunk of me they carved into a horse.
When I was split to the purple and somehow still
standing, they called me a cathedral.
Yet just to the left of that
I spilled all over velvet.
The velvet is what did it — 
I wanted to be smuggled.
Wanted to ride past all the alarms,
just before that drop of sweat hit
the floor. Wanted to end up in god-
knows-whose hands, a heist.
“Obscene,” said a man behind me,
“just in piles like that    ...    obscene.”
Then I spilled another carat, laughing.
In Missouri you could pluck me
straight up off the ground. Gumdrops,
gobstoppers, jujubes. I thought:
try to suck me down to nothing,
and find yourself up against one
million years. In piles like that.
Just out there. For anyone. Obscene.
The legs of the real thing were
opening, flash and flash and flash.
I said: go ahead and smash the glass.
Give me a break-in like a kaleidoscope.
Someone will entirely drip with me
as soon as I get out of here.
~~~
I want to write my lover a poem
but a very bad one. It'll include
a giant squid and some loose change
 
and cuff links and two blue ferries chugging
headfirst on the East River at twenty-six knots
and only at the last minute averting
 
disaster through quick thinking and sure reflexes. Also
a bow and arrow and glossy red apple
I perch in front of my heart. To be honest
 
my lover doesn't really like poetry,
which I guess is why I plan to write
such a bad one, so he can feel right
 
and strong and good in his beliefs.
Tonight when I go see my lover
he’ll hold me as I've never been held
 
except by him and then I'll have to give him
back. When you get new things
you treat them like glass for a while
 
and then get used to them
and manhandle them
like everything else.
 
I don't want to give him back
but partly it's not up to me and
partly I don't want to be his
 
old sofa. I want to radiate and gleam
arrestingly until the certain, premature
end. You can compose a whole life
 
out of these rollercoasters.
You can be everywhere
and nowhere, over and over
life slapping you in the face
 till you’re newly burnished
flat-out gasping and awake.
 
~~~
I don’t buy it, saysthe scientist.Replies the frailand faithful heart,it’s not for sale.
~~~
The future is as sterile as a robot’s loincloth.
I drown my hands in sanitizer until they pucker.
 
Where this soapbox tree germinates, I collect
my germs and make a fountain of them.
 
Because yellow is yarrow and soot, and the future,
I’ve learned, is no suture. Because where I’m from,
these kisses are infections. Because dirt’s
 
ammunition against discipline, the blood fills
my clean mouth with dismay. Am I surprised—
Hollywood still assumes we are all the bastard
 
children of the same evil dictator? That phosgene
and mustard will rack our titanium Maoist husks
until some white man with slanty eyes rescues us
 
from our mealy, pliant selves? Am I to wear Dior,
wrap my mouth in bloody tulle, before kneeling,
bending to kiss a mouth dirtied by Pantone 136?
 
No fucking thanks. Because where I’m from,
these kisses are infractions. Darlings, let’s rewrite
the script. Let’s hijack the narrative, steer
 
the story ourselves. There’d be a heist, a battle.
Audre Lorde would write the script. My leading
man would be Bruce. We’d earn our happy ending.
 
Instead, they give me 1981. 2012. Quantum quasars,
new dystopia—plutonium wars. We’re not in Polanski’s
Chinatown anymore. Yet we still have the same bowl
 
haircuts. Bangs, big bang, a city of fetid promise, new
minor galaxy where we cannot touch. Instead our skin
is rust and metal. It gratifies the technophile in all of us.
 
~~~
The Brent geese fly in long low wavering lines on their migrations.
They start in western Europe, fatten in Iceland, then fly over the
Greenland ice cap to Canada. They sometimes breed on the Arctic
coasts of central and western Siberia and winter in western Europe,
some in England, the rest in Germany and France. What I have to
offer here is nothing revolutionary. They learn the map from their
parents, or through culture rather than through genetics. It is just an
observation, a small observation that sometimes art can hold the oil
wars and all that they mean and might yet mean within. Just as
sometimes there are seven stanzas in a song. And just as sometimes
there is a refrain between each stanza. And just as often this sort of
song tells a certain sort of story, one about having something and then
losing it. Just as sometimes the refrain of a song is just one word said
four times. Just as sometimes the word is huge, sometimes coming
from a machine and yet hitting in the heart; uplifting and ironic and
big enough to hold all these things in its four syllables. Just as some-
times, often even, it contradicts, and thus works with, the stanzas. Just
as the police clear out yet another public space and yet another camera
follows along behind. Just as the stream has no narration, only ambient
noise. And the police move slowly, methodically in a line as if they are
a many-legged machine. They know what they are doing. It is their
third time clearing the park and they will clear it many more times and
then they will win and a building will be built where there once was
the park. In this song, as is true of many songs, it is unclear why the
singer has lost something, maybe someone. In this time, the time of
the oil wars, there are many reasons that singers give for being so lost.
Often they are lost because of love. Sometimes they are lost because of
drugs. Sometimes they have lost their country and in their heart it feels
as if they have lost something big. And then sometimes they are lost
just because they are in Bakersfield. Really though they are lost
because in this time song holds loss. And this time is a time of loss.
The police know, as they move through the park yet one more time,
that they will win and a building will be built on the space. But right
now, the building is not there. All that is there are the police and
debris and the police deal with the debris. They push over book-
shelves, open up boxes and look inside, tear into tents, awkwardly, the
poles springing. They are only there to see if any humans remain.
Tomorrow the bulldozers will push the debris into big piles and load it
into trucks. The police wear white helmets and short sleeves under
their kevlar vests. For many years the Brent geese ate eelgrass, but once
the eelgrass was gone to the wasting disease and the estuaries filled,
they moved inland to agricultural lands and began eating grasses and
winter-sown cereals. The Brent geese are social, adaptable. They fly
around together, learning from each other, even as these groups are
often unstable, changing from season to season. Songs in their most
popular versions tend to be epiphanic, gorgeous with swelling chord
changes, full of lament too. And this song, like many, expresses the
desire to be near someone who is now lost. It travels as something
layered, infiltrated, unconfused with its refusals to make a simple
sense. I want to give you this song sung in a bar in Oakland one night
during the ongoing oil wars. The singer had clearly been lost once, but
they sang as someone who eventually got in the car and drove out of
Bakersfield, perhaps early in the morning, the sun just starting to rise,
or perhaps later after sun-up, the light washing out everything in
Bakersfield as the sun is wont to do there. Eventually they arrived to
sing this song. This might have taken them many years. There was
nothing that implied that the lostness was recent. But the lostness, it
was clear, was huge and had been experienced fully by them. It
probably doesn't matter where the sun was that day in Bakersfield
when they got in the car. It probably just matters that there is a sun,
still, and they got in the car and drove, drove through the oil fields with
their wells pumping out amber colored oils and their refineries with
tall towers that heat the oil so as to sort its various viscosities, and drove
through the black cloud that is the slow constant burn of the oil wars.
Then at some point they were in Oakland. The oil near Bakersfield is
heavy but it often benchmarks against the Brent blend. Brent blend is
a light crude oil, though not as light as West Texas Intermediate. It
contains approximately 0.37% of sulphur, classifying it as sweet crude,
yet not as sweet as West Texas Intermediate. When the park is cleared
and the building is built, it will headquarter an oil company. When
this oil company named their oil fields off the coast of Scotland, they
choose the names of water birds in alphabetical order: Auk, Brent,
Cormorant, Dunlin, Eider, Fulmar, and so on. Brent is also an
acronym for the Jurassic Brent formation that makes up the Brent
oilfield, for Broom, Rannoch, Etive, Ness, and Tarbert. About two
thirds of oil is benchmarked against what is called the Brent Crude Oil
Spot price. Petroleum suppliers in Europe, Africa and the Middle East
often price their oil according to Brent Crude's value on the Interconti-
nential Exchange if it is being sold to the West. The Brent Crude Oil
Spot price is set in dollars, maintained by force, endlessly manipulated
by commodity futures markets. The refrain is the moment when the
singer makes it clear that they understand something about what is
being lost. It was obvious they had lost their country, it being taken
over by bankers and all. They had clearly been rejected. Loved too
much and gotten too little of it back in return, many times. But none
of this matters, it was obvious, in comparison to what is now being lost
for that night even though the song is about a minor loss, about the loss
of tongue on clit or cock, the singer seemed to understand s0mething
about the other things that are lost. While a formation of police clear
the far side of the park of the debris of its occupation, another forma-
tion of police on the other side shoot the new gasses, the ones we do
not yet know by name, into another part of the park where people are
now clustered. This camera  has sound and every few seconds there is a
pop. It is unevenly steady. The song is just about two people who are
not near each other, who have probably chosen not to be near each
other any more. The song reflects and refracts the oil in ways both
relevant and trivial in how it tells about what happens when one lets
love go, when one gives up the tongue. It might be that only through
the minor we can feel enormity. It might be that there is nothing to 
epiphany if it does not hint at the moment of sweaty relation larger
than the intimate. For what is epiphanic song if it doesn't spill out and
over the many that are pulled from intimacies by oil's circulations?
The truckers, the sailors and deckhands, the assembly line workers,
those who maintain the pipelines, those who drive support in the
caravans that escort the tankers, the fertilizers, the thousands of
interlocking plastic parts, the workers who move two hundred miles
and live in a dorm near a factory, alone, those on the ships who spend
fifty weeks circulating with the oil unable to talk to each other because
of no shared language and so are left only with two weeks in each year
where they can experience the tongue in meaningful conversation. A
life that is only circulations. Before the police come, before the
building, in the middle of one night, a group of people form a line
leading to the entrance of the park. Or several groups form several
lines, all leading to the entrance. Some wear medical masks. Some
wear glasses too. All pass bricks, one by one, down the line so as to
make a pile. They are silent for the most part, silent enough that it is
possible to hear the bricks make a clink as they fall. The pile gets
bigger and bigger. It is waist high. Then chest high. Some get out of
the line and climb on the pile, hold both their hands in the air because
they know now is the transitory, momentary triumph and it should be
felt. Others continue passing brick after brick, from one hand to 
another hand, arms extended, torsos at moments also going back and
forth with the bricks. When they run out of bricks, the pile is topped
with fencing. Then they gather behind it, waiting. Back there, some-
one might possibly be singing to a child, singing the epiphanic song
that alludes to losing the moment of tongue on clit or cock over and
over because the child cannot be comforted, because the singer knows
only loss. The room will be dark. The light will be on in the hall.
There will be shadows, in other words. And the singer will know about
these shadows at this moment and know they had agreed to be with
shadows when they had the child. They had gambled in a sense on a
question of sustaining. They had agreed to exist from now on with a 
shadow. A shadow of love and a shadow of the burning of the oil fields that
has already happened and is yet to come and yet must come and a million
other shadows that might possibly disappear in the light at that moment.
 
~~~
Everything about the young foreign taxidermist was overdone. Did he absolutely have to wear the apron with the tiny red castles in the shop? Or weave, at night, in and out of the trees? I don’t think so. I would bring him buckets of ice water day after day hoping he would just cool off a bit. Fact is, he never did. But to be fair, he really was practicing what the papers called, “heroic medicine.” It was love. I admit it. It was fancy love. I was the envy of the world, being hitched up with such a genius, and that felt good. Of course, these days, I can’t touch rope or a small child without thinking of him. Without expecting his large hands to come out of nowhere. We were, as mother said, both “slowly losing our minds.” He’d talk for hours about hygiene, the Water Cure for example, and wrote an award-winning essay on the Electric Bath as a way to treat hysteria in the female fox. “Too many foxes,” he would say, shaking his fist, “too many foxes running around like chickens with their heads cut off.” In the winter months we would ride our bicycles down to the scrap-metal yard where he would make love to me in devout silence. The delight in his eyes when he found that small cage! He was both tender and rough, and I had never, and will never again, be as touched by another man. I didn’t notice the black mustache growing slowly but unmercifully on his left shoulder until two or three years into the affair. At first it seemed harmless. A small patch of dead grass. But eventually I couldn’t help but only see the large dark field. Its silent twitching. By then it was already early fall, and the fact is, it tore us apart.
~~~
It seems a certain fear underlies everything.
If I were to tell you something profound
it would be useless, as every single thing I know
is not timeless. I am particularly risk-averse.
I choose someone else over me every time,
as I'm sure they'll finish the task at hand,
which is to say that whatever is in front of us
will get done if I'm not in charge of it.
There is a limit to the number of times
I can practice every single kind of mortification
(of the flesh?). I can turn toward you and say yes,
it was you in the poem
~~~
In the frozen square, the student asks me if I will
sell him the books from my backpack. He hides them
under his winter coat. Steam rises from the whole
wheat rolls we break open at the breakfast table.
We drink hot apple tea and pronounce the skyline
“charming.” In a jail a man counts the visible bones,
and recounts them in the blaze of morning. To turn
a self to light proves painful — each piece must
be dissected in turn; you pass through every feeling
imaginable, so many you might make a dictionary — 
dread to disgust, delight to degradation. The prisoner
remembers wanting only to read as if in a fever — 
running fingers over pyramids of words as if he might
translate himself from this life to a more vivid existence
in which he cuts open the pages with a knife in
plain sight of everyone like a man eating meat and
potatoes at the dinner table. Not that world; this one
where blue light and sharpened files, where identikit
and stamps on passports, where the book in his back-
pack is a crime, and I have sold him down the river
for ideas I barely value — the volumes flung carelessly
across my hotel room, while he picks mushrooms on
the edge of dread, pallid ghosts of what won’t speak
or be spoken. Or where I remember what it is to
be present in the world, and I turn away, unable to
bear it — so much light and dread, so much in the darkness
growing or simply how hard to ever remain in place.
~~~
Somewhere out of antiquity someone work with me.When transferring a thought, the connectors and clausesrecede: you get it. I got it — The rest of the language, beauty and playI am your master, the thought says —        I disagreeI’m thinking about the church where weheld my brother’s funeral. He says, I was there:it hurt me; you cried too much; I don’t mindlater. I just want to be with you, the thought saysYou mean thee thought or his thought?The rocks are like stars, gully full of stars.If I go with anyone anywhere, if they’dthink sweetly to me. No one hears. Relax your shoulders.I’m singing to you over and over “to a new sex.”Sometimes it seems like there’s a lizard for each rocknecklaces of lives,
   there’s room for an infinity of minds. Thoughts. Anywhere. Enter my headif you wish. No ends or purposesPrevailed fortunes. I have a destiny. My deathwill not complete it.
~~~
(For Holy Cross Day, 1914)



 Clouds is under clouds and rain   For there will not come again   Two, the beloved sire and son   Whom all gifts were rained upon.     Kindness is all done, alas,   Courtesy and grace must pass,   Beauty, wit and charm lie dead,   Love no more may wreathe the head.     Now the branch that waved so high   No wind tosses to the sky;   There's no flowering time to come,   No sweet leafage and no bloom.     Percy, golden-hearted boy,   In the heyday of his joy   Left his new-made bride and chose   The steep way that Honour goes.     Took for his the deathless song   Of the love that knows no wrong:   Could I love thee, dear, so true   Were not Honour more than you?     (Oh, forgive, dear Lovelace, laid   In this mean Procrustean bed!)   Dear, I love thee best of all   When I go, at England's call.     In our magnificent sky aglow   How shall we this Percy know   Where he shines among the suns   And the planets and the moons?     Percy died for England, why,   Here's a sign to know him by!   There's one dear and fixèd star,   There's a youngling never far.     Percy and his father keep   The old loved companionship,   And shine downward in one ray   Where at Clouds they wait for day. 
~~~
                           Does Rhea think? Does Rhea think?Does Rhea think? Does Rhea think?                                 Does Rhea think?                           Does Rhea think? Does Rhea think?Does Rhea think? Does Rhea think?                                 Does Rhea think? 
~~~
O my Love sent me a lusty list,
Did not compare me to a summer's day
Wrote not the beauty of mine eyes
But catalogued in a pretty detailed
And comprehensive way the way(s)
In which he was better than me.
"More capable of extra- and inter-
Polation. More well-traveled -rounded multi-
Lingual! More practiced in so many matters
More: physical, artistic, musical,
Politic(al) academic (I dare say!) social
(In many ways!) and (ditto!) sexual!”
And yet these mores undid but his own plea(s)(e)
And left, none-the-less, the Greater Moor of me.
 
~~~
I
   Here is your eye. Here are the alleles which give color to your eye, the mixed routes of reference, the million times more than anybody could ever be missed. Flock. The idea of flock. Hundreds of agitated birds swooping over the bridge. Our blessèd moments. Shapes of soft parts, a quantifiable relation to objects, we turn now to your vitreous humor. Shut the lights off, turn the meat down, cover your head. I started doing my duty. Graphs of a dancer’s movements. Ten sections of a neural issue. As from air to the cornea. Who in the person is larval or asexual. Who in the person will sit in. Hachure. A parallel walk. From one density to a different density. I was you, once. Come, come, under your skin. In the body receiving itself or its analogies. The my. The bow down before you. White pine to white pine. White pine to redwing to lantern fish.
   II
   She was full.
   She was full with it.
   III
   and then though
   through though
   and then through the loop just made
   IV
   Believe it or not I would swap his desire to see patterns gathering. Believe it or not we set off several long-haired bodies. Believe it or not that was the whole of our aestivation. Believe it or not stop talking about me as if I were not in the room. Pop open a new one. The developing figure was a monk bent over. Come allow us to see the sower sow. She contested the waters. Get thee behind. Something in her eye kept giving you the needle. Something in her eye kept falling out of line. Believe it or not three persons in one shadow. Believe it or not could you spare a mind. It clawed each thing as if a temporal sequence. It clawed each thing as if a temporal w/hole. Believe it or not six or eight ways of counting on your reticence. Believe it or not these long thin rods and the wider cones.
~~~
On this first day of spring, snow
covers the fruit trees, mingling improbably   
with the new blossoms like identical twins   
brought up in different hemispheres.   
It is not what Housman meant
when he wrote of the cherry
hung with snow, though he also knew   
how death can mistake the seasons,   
and if he made it all sound pretty,   
that was our misreading
in those high school classrooms
where, drunk on boredom, we had to recite   
his poems. Now the weather is always looming
in the background, trying to become more   
than merely scenery, and though today   
it is telling us something
we don't want to hear, it is all
so unpredictable, so out of control
that we might as well be children again,   
hearing the voices of thunder
like baritone uncles shouting
in the next room as we try to sleep,   
or hearing the silence of snow falling   
soft as a coverlet, even in springtime   
whispering: relax, there is nothing   
you can possibly do about any of this.
~~~
I think very well of Susan but I do not know her name   
I think very well of Ellen but which is not the same   
I think very well of Paul I tell him not to do so
I think very well of Francis Charles but do I do so
I think very well of Thomas but I do not not do so
I think very well of not very well of William   
I think very well of any very well of him   
I think very well of him.
It is remarkable how quickly they learn
But if they learn and it is very remarkable how quickly they learn
It makes not only but by and by   
And they may not only be not here   
But not there
Which after all makes no difference
After all this does not make any does not make any difference
I add added it to it.
I could rather be rather be here.
~~~
It’s like being lost in the forest, hungry, with a plump live chicken in your cradling arms: you want to savage the bird, but you also want the eggs. You go weak on your legs. What’s worse, what you need most is the companionship, but you’re too hungry to know that. That is something you only know after you’ve been lost a lot and always, eventually, alit upon your bird; consumed her before you’d realized what a friend she’d been, letting you sleep-in late on the forest floor though she herself awoke at the moment of dawn and thought of long-lost rooster voices quaking the golden straw. She looks over at you, sleeping, and what can I tell you, she loves you, but like a friend. Eventually, when lost in a forest with a friendly chicken you make a point of emerging from the woods together, triumphant; her, fat with bugs, you, lean with berries. Still, while you yet wander, you can not resist telling her your joke: Guy sees a pig with three legs, asks the farmer, What gives? Farmer says, That pig woke my family from a fire, got us all out. Says the guy, And lost the leg thereby? Nope, says the farmer, Still had all four when he took  a bullet for me when I had  my little struggle with the law. Guy nods, So that’s where  he lost his paw? Farmer shakes it off, says, Nah, we fixed him up. A pause, guy says, So how’d he lose  the leg? Farmer says, Well, hell, a pig like that  you don’t eat all at once. Chicken squints. Doesn’t think it’s funny.
~~~
                                         It was relatively painless except for being
all she could see: a world made of dinner, very pleasant; a lunch
at something called a table in the dining room; an endless night;
a half-day; another lunch, this on Tuesday. Yesterday. Today.
Pieces propped up with supports. The therapist tapped his cigar.
He no longer accepted her general opposition to myth, marriage,
Olympic Games, and the course of decades. He said it was as if
she were engaged in an eternal war, either watching a movie
or acting in one, depending on the situation and time of day.
She sat in silence, the sky above a half-baked blue, a blank-
face dying of awkwardness. The simple explanation boiled down
to the too-easy explanation. He was smart and charming then;
and later, much less so. Behind his head, pictures were crammed
together with the top layer hung so high she had to crane her neck
to see the details. He said to please pretend she was listening.
~~~
when i look at my life
i feel like bursting into tears
marriage
and mental illness
vintage washed
michael jackson graphic
spiritual disco grieving ritual
sell your body
to your horse-eyed past
little fictions
somebody got to sing
and somebody
got to play the squaw
last time i saw him
last time i saw my honey
buried your dead
lack of afro
exit wounds
cut off whole limbs
of generational desire
the death of cleopatra
hell or high water
get some fucking
love in your life girl
ghost chant
you’ve got to die
if you want to live
amidst and against 
the things we are 
rubbed into the cloth
wrapped around their faces
now white men
are black men too
the ways
we can’t say no
i call you queen
not as a term of endearment
but as a reminder
our histories meet
on the inside
we all be black moses
slave for the river
same river twice
sometimes
have to emphasize
the brown part
hey there beautiful brown girl
we don't usually change
until things are so painful
that we must
 
~~~
He fancies his chances are good with her, unaware that in the years since the war she has come to prefer women whose cunts taste like mustard. To pin one’s hopes on a bark-colored moth, its wings crinkled like crepe paper, a moth affixed high on the kitchen wall, frozen for days where it will likely die in noble clinging modejust under the cobwebby heating vent, is to confirm your need for more friends and a greater daily quota of sunlight. To raise C.’s hopes that T. can stop drinking and then to liken those hopes to fields of undulating grain, alfalfa perhaps, is to wish C. hip deep in acres of unscythed denial. The blind typist hopes she’ll be hired tonight without her disability becoming an issue. L. said he felt hope’s rhizomes race throughout his body, radiating in all directions, like some incipient disease he’d been fighting since childhood. Hope, he said, it’s as insidious as bitterness. If mother earth only knew how much we loved one another she would creak, shudder, and split like a macheted melon, releasing the fiery ball of molten hope at her core.
~~~
Some thought it was because of all the babies I suddenly seemed to be having. Others, that I should pay for the damages. Fact is, I wasn’t getting any older, so I bought a small aquarium, and skipped town. Took up with a toy store owner until he left me for a more beautiful robot. Took up with a reader of instructional booklets. Never mind. I was lost. By the time I arrived at Mrs. Greenaway’s, it was clear I was nowhere at all. In exchange for room and board, I’d rearrange her furniture, her birthmarks, her quiet animals, until they took on more satisfying shapes. Sometimes the shapes were simple, like a mustache or a pipe. Sometimes they were more complicated arrangements, like the one of dead Mr. Greenaway’s closed barbershop. Over the years, as Mrs. Greenaway and I became more and more vague, the shapes did too. For identification purposes, we’d give them names like She Wasn’t Fooling Anyone, She Was Hurt and She Was Hurt Bad or The Insides of Doctors. One night when I was working on a piece I thought I’d call Symphony, Symphony, the shapes began to slip out of my hands. At first, as Mrs. Greenaway remembers, the sound of broken glass. Then the trumpets. Then the terrible music of all those babies I once seemed to be suddenly having, marching, like soldiers, in rows. Then their round wet bellies coming towards me. Mrs. Greenaway still talks about how expertly they gathered me into their tiny arms. And how they took me away not like a prisoner. But like a mother. Into a past I still swear I never had.
~~~
When I boarded the plane, everyone looked like Uncle Tomruddy, some were empurpledgray hair or auburn in terrier thatchespale blue of eyea smidgen of resignation:the tribe.I thought We are driving to the interiorI thought holy godthe airline upholsterywas Yeats, Kavanagh and Heaneyhandwriting. I thoughtholy shit, this is the maw.The maw.
~~~
Protestants pray for grace, Scientists look to space. Jews find truth in the Torah, New Agers, in each other's aura. Catholics are blessed by a Pope, Yaquis enlightened by dope. Maoris use ritual chants, Navahos get up and dance. Muslims bow daily to Allah, Norsemen aspire to Valhalla. Feminists swear by a She, Quakers swear not, silently. Confucians kowtow to ancestors, Hare Krishnas, to airport investors. Hindus revere Lord Brahma, Richard Gere, the Dalai Lama. Baptists believe in the Ark, Physicists, in the quark. Moonies obey Reverend Sun, Mormons say Brigham's the one. Daoists extol yang and yin, Sufis transcend in a spin. Shintos seek peace where it's grassy, Rastas, in Haile Selassie. When we meet in the Afterlife, We can laugh at sectarian strife. But meanwhile back to the wars, 'Cause my God's better than yours.
~~~
I had heard the story before about the two prisoners, alone in the same cell, and one gives the other lessons in a language. Day after day, the pupil studies hard—what else does he have to do?—and year after year they practice, waiting for the hour of release. They tackle the nouns, the cases, and genders, the rules for imperatives and conjugations, but near the end of his sentence, the teacher suddenly dies and only the pupil goes back through the gate and into the open world. He travels to the country of his new language, fluent, and full of hope. Yet when he arrives he finds that the language he speaks is not the language that is spoken. He has learned a language one other person knew—its inventor, his cell-mate and teacher.                          And then the other evening, I heard the story again. This time the teacher was Gombrowicz, the pupil was his wife. She had dreamed of learning Polish and, hour after hour, for years on end, Gombrowicz had been willing to teach her a Polish that does not and never did exist. The man who told the story would like to marry his girlfriend. They love to read in bed and betweenthem speak three languages. They laughed—at the wife, at Gombrowicz, it wasn’tclear, and I wasn’t sure that they themselves knew what was funny. I wondered why the man had told the story, and thought of the tricks enclosure can play. A nod, or silence, another nod, consent—or not, as a cloud drifts beyond the scene and the two stand pointing in different directions at the very same empty sky.                           Even so, there was something else about the story, like teaching a stunt to an animal—a four-legged creature might prance on two legs or a two-legged creature might fall onto four.                           ﻿I remembered, then, the miscarriage, and before that the months of waiting: like baskets filled with bright shapes, the imagination run wild. And then what arrived:the event that was nothing, a mistaken idea, a scrap of charred cloth, the enormous present folding over the future, like a wave overtaking a grain of sand.                            There was a myth I once knew about twins who spoke a private language, though one spoke only the truth and the other only lies. The savior gets mixed up with the traitor, but the traitor stays as true to himself as a god. All night the rain falls here, falls there,and the creatures dream, or drown, in the lair.
~~~
the Tuesday after he was last seen. 
A policeman is there to pick the shrill thing up. Who is it? the couple of friends present ask as he cups it to his ear. 
Then hangs up. There was no one there. 
They have come to recon a vacant property—a mise en scéne: 
Knoll butterfly chairs—a pair of them—
 
two red socks soaking in the white bathroom sink,
 
a saucer of milk for the cat to drink,
 
a stack of reel-to-reel tapes,
 
a matchbook from the Italian Village where he ate his last spaghetti
dinner,
 
& two books he’d been re-reading, or wanted someone to think he
had:
 The Devils & The Tragic Sense of Life. 
Preoccupation & a certain mode of self-presentation. 
Even when absent, Robinson has a style. 
No wallet, though. No watch, no sleeping bag, no bankbook. 
The apartment looks the way it feels to read a newspaper that’s one
day old. 
The policeman wants to go back outside, among the lemons & fog &
barking dogs. 
Out where the sun can copper their faces. 
Writing takes space, recordings take time. 
The place puts the policeman in mind of something he read recently,
about the collapse of a dead star. 
About how it takes ages for the light to become motionless. 
Seven years after a disappearance, a person can be pronounced dead. 
But that’s nothing compared to the size of the ocean.
~~~
In the valley of your art history book,   
the corpses stack in the back of a cart
drawn by an ox whose rolling shoulder muscles   
show its considerable weight.
He does this often. His velvet nostrils   
flare to indicate the stench.
It’s the smell you catch after class
while descending a urine-soaked
subway stair on a summer night
in a neighborhood where cabs won’t drive:   
the odor of dead flowers, fear
multiplied a thousand times.
The train door’s hiss
seals you inside with a frail boy   
swaying from a silver hoop.
He coughs in your direction, his eyes   
are burn holes in his face.
Back in the fourteenth-century print   
lying in your lap, a hand
white as an orchid has sprouted   
from the pyramid of flesh.
It claws the smoky air.
Were it not for that,
the cart might carry green cordwood   
(the human body knobby and unplaned).
Wrap your fingers around your neck   
and feel the stony glands.   
Count the holes in your belt loop
for lost weight.
In the black unfurling glass,
study the hard planes of your face.
Compare it to the prom picture   
in your wallet, the orchid
pinned to your chest like a spider.
Think of the flames
at your high school bonfire
licking the black sky, ashes rising,
innumerable stars. The fingers that wove   
with your fingers
have somehow turned to bone.
The subway shudders between dark and light.   
The ox plods across the page.
Think of everyone
you ever loved: the boy   
who gets off at your stop
is a faint ideogram for each.
Offer him your hand.   
Help him climb the stair.
~~~
They sang Green, Green Grass of Home sailing west from New Orleans.They sang Ne Me Quitte Pas beneath mesquitewhile digging graves in Matagorda.Pelican soup was a vile, greasy potage.They sang Green, Green Grass of  Homewhere alligator was a luxury (the meat)down at the Turtle Bayou Turnaround.They sang Ne Me Quitte Pas beneath mesquite.Near the Old and Lost River they surmisedSpanish moss strains coffee pretty good.They sang Green, Green Grass of Home.They were whingeing Stuck in Lodi,forty Slavonians in the Big Thicket.They sang Ne Me Quitte Pas beneath mesquite.They cut down the trees, they sawed the blocks,split the blocks into billets, split the billets into boards.They sang Green, Green Grass of Home.They sang Ne Me Quitte Pas beneath mesquite. • Frederick Olmsted was right when he wroteG.T.T. (Gone to Texas) was appended“to every man’s name who had disappearedbefore the discovery of some rascality.”Brands were a language: Shanghai M, Running W.Frederick Olmsted was right when he wrote,or rode upright, through “a sort of Brobdingnag grass.” Bradded L, Walking R, Swinging   J.Every man’s name who had disappearedsinged like needles off a cactus, whiskers off rope(this was a practice). Rocking T, Tumbling K —Frederick Olmsted was right when he wrotein the alphabet we got from the Canaanites.Oxhead A. Camel G. If it doesn’t brand, it bites.To every man’s name who had disappeared,someone added: Sent to heaven to hunt for a harp. Or maybe it was another case of slow.Olmsted slowed so he could write while he rodeamong men whose names had disappeared.
~~~
You and me, of course, and the animals
we feed and then slaughter. The boxelder
bug with its dot of red, yeast in the air
making bread and wine, bacteria
in yogurt, carrots, the apple tree,
each white blossom. And rock, which lives
so slowly it’s hard to imagine it
as sand then glass. A sea called dead is one that
will not mirror us. We think as human
beings we deserve every last thing. Say
the element copper. Incandescence
glowing bright and soft like Venus.
Ductile as a shewolf’s eyes pigmented red
or green, exposed to acid in the air.
Copper primes your liver, its mines leach lead
and arsenic. Smelting is to melting
the way smite is to mite. A violence
of extraction. What’s lost when a language
dies? When its tropes oppose our own?
In the at-risk language Aymara
the past stretches out in front, the future
lags behind. Imagine being led
by knowing, imagine the end as clear.
~~~
       Eating is her subject.
       While eating is her subject.
       Where eating is her subject.
       Withdraw whether it is eating which is her subject. Literally
while she ate eating is her subject. Afterwards too and in be-
tween. This is an introduction to what she ate.
       She ate a pigeon and a soufflé.
       That was on one day.
       She ate a thin ham and its sauce.
       That was on another day.
       She ate desserts.
       That had been on one day.
       She had fish grouse and little cakes that was before that day.
       She had breaded veal and grapes that was on that day.
       After that she ate every day.
       Very little but very good.
       She ate very well that day.
       What is the difference between steaming and roasting, she
ate it cold because of Saturday.
       Remembering potatoes because of preparation for part of
the day.
       There is a difference in preparation of cray-fish which makes a
change in their fish for instance.
       What was it besides bread.
       Why is eating her subject.
       There are reasons why eating is her subject.
       Because.
       Help Helena.
       With whether a pound.
       Everybody who comes has been with whether we mean ours
allowed.
       Tea rose snuff box tea rose.
       Willed him well will till well.
       By higher but tire by cry my tie for her.
       Meeting with with said.
       Gain may be hours.
       There there their softness.
       By my buy high.
       By my softness.
       There with their willow with without out outmost lain in out.
       Has she had her tooth without a telegram.
       Nothing surprises Edith. Her sister made it once for all.
       Chair met alongside.
       Paved picnic with gratitude.
       He is strong and sturdy.
       Pile with a pretty boy.
       Having tired of some one.
       Tire try.
       Imagine how they felt when they were invited.
       Preamble to restitution.
       Tire and indifferent.
       Narratives with pistache.
       A partly boiled.
       Next sentence.
       Now or not nightly.
       A sentence it is a whether wither intended.
       A sentence text. Taxed.
       A sampler with ingredients may be unmixed with their ac-
counts how does it look like. If in way around. Like lightning.
       Apprehension is why they help to do what is in amount what
is an amount.
       A sentence felt way laid.
       A sentence without a horse.
       It is a mend that to distribute with send.
       A sentence is in a letter ladder latter.
       Birth with birth.
       If any thinks about what is made for the sake they will
manage to place taking take may.
       How are browns.
       How are browns.
       Got to go away.
       Anybody can be taught to love whatever whatever they like
better.
       Taught of butter.
       Whatever they like better.
       Unify is to repeat alike like letter.
       To a sentence.
       Answer do you need what it is vulnerable.
       There made an assay.
       Wire on duck.
       Please forget Kate.
       Please and do forbid how very well they like it.
       Paid it forbid forfeit a renewal.
       A sentence may be near by.
       Very well in eighty.
       If a letter with mine how are hear in all. This is to show that
a letter is better. Than seen.
       A sentence is money made beautiful. Beautiful words of
love. Really thought at a sentence very likely.
       How do you do they knew.
       A sentence made absurd.
       She is sure that he showed that he would be where a month.
       This is the leaf safe safety.
       This is the relief safe safely.
       A joined in compel commit comply angle of by and by with
all.
       Sorry to have been shaded easily by their hastened their
known go in find.
       In never indented never the less.
       As a wedding of their knowing with which whether they
could guess.
       Bewildered in infancy with compliments makes their agree-
ment strange.
       Houses have distributed in dividing with a pastime that they
called whose as it.
       Bent in view. With vein meant. Then at in impenetrable
covered with the same that it is having sent.
       Are eight seen to be pale apples.
       A sentence is a subterfuge refuge refuse for an admirable
record of their being in private admirable refuge for their being
in private this in vain their collide.
       A sentence controls does play shade.
       A sentence having been hours first.
       A sentence rest he likes a sentence lest best with interest.
       Induce sentences.
       A sentence makes them for stairs for stairs do bedew.
       A sentence about nothing in a sentence about nothing that
pale apples from rushing are best.
       No powder or power or power form form fortification in
vain of their verification of their very verification within with
whim with a whim which is in an implanted hour.
       Suppose a sentence.
       How are ours in glass.
       Glass makes ground glass.
       A sentence of their noun.
       How are you in invented complimented.
       How are you in in favourite.
       Thinking of sentences in complimented.
       Sentences in in complimented in thank in think in sentences
in think in complimented.
       Sentences should not shrink. Complimented.
       A sentence two sentences should not think complimented.
Complimented.
       How do you do if you are to to well complimented. A sen-
tence leans to along.
       Once when they went they made the name the same do do
climbed in a great many however they are that is why without
on account faired just as well as mention. Next they can come
being in tears, governess a part of plums comfort with our
aghast either by feel torn.
       How can whose but dear me oh.
       Darling how is George. George is well. Violate Thomas but
or must with pine and near and do and dare defy.
       Haynes is Mabel Haynes.
       What was what was what it was what is what is what is is
what is what which is what is is it.
       At since robbed of a pre prize sent.
       Tell a title.
       What was it that made him be mine what was it.
       Three years lack back back made well well willows three
years back.
       It never makes it bathe a face.
       How are how are how are how are how are heard. Weak-
ness is said.
       Jay James go in George Wilbur right with a prayed in de-
gree.
       We leave we form we regret.
       That these which with agrees adjoin comes clarity in eagle
quality that periodic when men calls radically readily read in
mean to mention.
       What is ate ate in absurd.
       Mathilda makes ours see.
       An epoch is identical with usury.
       A very long hour makes them hire lain down.
       Two tempting to them.
       Follow felt follow.
       He loves his aigrette too with mainly did in most she could
not newly instead dumb done entirely.
       Absurd our our absurd.
       With flight.
       Take him and think of him. He and think of him. With
him think of him. With him and with think with think with
think with him.
~~~
Ah! why, because the dazzling sunRestored my earth to joyHave you departed, every one,And left a desert sky?All through the night, your glorious eyesWere gazing down in mine,And with a full heart's thankful sighsI blessed that watch divine!I was at peace, and drank your beamsAs they were life to meAnd revelled in my changeful dreamsLike petrel on the sea.Thought followed thought—star followed starThrough boundless regions on,While one sweet influence, near and far,Thrilled through and proved us one.Why did the morning rise to breakSo great, so pure a spell,And scorch with fire the tranquil cheekWhere your cool radiance fell?Blood-red he rose, and arrow-straight,His fierce beams struck my brow;The soul of Nature sprang elate,But mine sank sad and low!My lids closed down—yet through their veilI saw him blazing still;And bathe in gold the misty dale,And flash upon the hill.I turned me to the pillow thenTo call back Night, and seeYour worlds of solemn light, againThrob with my heart and me!It would not do—the pillow glowedAnd glowed both roof and floor,And birds sang loudly in the wood,And fresh winds shook the door.The curtains waved, the wakened fliesWere murmuring round my room,Imprisoned there, till I should riseAnd give them leave to roam.O Stars and Dreams and Gentle Night;O Night and Stars return!And hide me from the hostile lightThat does not warm, but burn—That drains the blood of suffering men;Drinks tears, instead of dew:Let me sleep through his blinding reign,And only wake with you!
~~~
On an island the soft hue of memory,
moss green, kerosene yellow, drifting, mingling
in the Caribbean Sea,
a six-year-old named Alfred
learns all the words to all the songs
on his grandparents’ jukebox, and sings them.
To learn the words is not so hard.
Many barmaids and teenagers have done as well.
But to sing as Alfred sings—
how can a giant whale live in the small pool of his chest?
How can there be breakers this high, notes crashing
at the beach of the throat,
and a reef of coral so enormous only the fishes know its size?
The grandparents watch. They can’t sing.
They don’t know who this voice is, trapped in their grandson’s body.
The boy whose parents sent him back to the island
to chatter mango-talk and scrap with chickens—
three years ago he didn’t know the word “sad”!
Now he strings a hundred passionate sentences on a single line.
He bangs his fist so they will raise the volume.
What will they do together in their old age?
It is hard enough keeping yourself alive.
And this wild boy, loving nothing but music—
he’ll sing all night, hugging the jukebox.
When a record pauses, that live second before dropping down,
Alfred hugs tighter, arms stretched wide,
head pressed on the luminous belly. “Now!” he yells.
A half-smile when the needle breathes again.
They’ve tried putting him to bed, but he sings in bed.
Even in Spanish—and he doesn’t speak Spanish!
Sings and screams, wants to go back to the jukebox.O mama I was born with a trumpet in my throat
      spent all these years tryin’ to cough it up …
~~~
Three items in an envelope. A photograph of two, four, six, eight, nine boys boarding a bus. Not boys, men. Dressed in the long wool coat of winter. Something “based on the life of.” What can a moment outlast? That question becomes a theory, theorem, mechanism. Three boys, one girl, a tree brushing back air off her forehead. Paper, six clean sheets, a monogrammed envelope. An index. The physical bias to existence becomes some wedge, the inexact value of an empire of ether. Tick-tick. The amphibian emerges from water, walks off stage. It’s as if evolution is embodied in absence. Someone is lying on her back. She turns over. Her breath is in the air. Or in the idea of atmosphere.
~~~
She appears to be recognized as herself and not herself, new because endlessly recycled, not what she was but not what she will be—see? Not married and not not married, the processional’s a ritual meant to extend a magical present, until the head of this pin is the size of a rented hall and all of us angels stepping out on the long blank train of her on-going gown. To go in single and come married out is easy enough, what matters is to enlarge the interstitial, to live as long as we can in the not exactly no longer and the not quite not yet also. Where organ music drowns the ill-digested vows and the empty stomach growls. Hesitant. The BND goes down slow as a pill we can’t really swallow, stuck chunk in a stalled gulp between yesterday and tomorrow, at one and the same time belated and punctual. It’s the system itself we’ve come to see (open the plug of that rubber-edged rose window), not me and not you, but we: the marriage of church and state made visible, audible, available. Here Dearly Beloved’s an embarrassing gurgle, and the costly gown so much densely crumpled bathroom tissue backing up one overworked way in and out of the usual world. From the mouth to points South, scrawl that in soap on the vehicle? From “will you?” to “why don’t you ever?” on the march to “irreconcilable.” Hey—whoa! Away with you hand-wringing nay sayers: be here now now now now…. Cheeks are flushed and eyes overflow as we grasp her new handle, here to hear the I do as a couple of hard blows: that flesh-blunted sound of bone on bone dislodging as cough a caught morsel not thoroughly chewed. Back out, back up, quagmire, circle: proposed solutions involve the usual budget expansions, extended tours of duty, and additional troops.
~~~
Last night I awoke knewThat I should say goodbye nowTo these verses. That's how it always goesAfter a few years. They have to get outInto the world. It's not possible to keep themForever! here under the roof.Poor things. They must set out for town.A few will be allowed to return later.But most of them are still hanging around out there.Who knows what will become of them. Before theyFind their peace.
~~~
A Poet am I neither born nor bred,But to a witty poet married:Whose brain is fresh and pleasant as the Spring,Where Fancies grow and where the Muses sing. There oft I lean my head, and listening, hark,To catch his words and all his fancies mark:And from that garden show of beauties takeWhereof a posy I in verse may make. Thus I, that have no gardens of my own,There gather flowers that are newly blown.
~~~
I read a Korean poem
with the line “Today you are the youngest
you will ever be.” Today I am the oldest
I have been. Today we drink
buckwheat tea. Today I have heat
in my apartment. Today I think
about the word chada in Korean.
It means cold. It means to be filled with. 
It means to kick. To wear. Today we’re worn.
Today you wear the cold. Your chilled skin.
My heart knocks on my skin. Someone said
winter has broken his windows. The heat inside
and the cold outside sent lightning across glass.
Today my heart wears you like curtains. Today
it fills with you. The window in my room
is full of leaves ready to fall. Chada, you say. It’s tea. 
We drink. It is cold outside.
 
~~~
years of  practice for a soft         landing in the slaughter                 we looked far off to              a flag sewn into fleshdear enemy come down the     hill I have taken a title outof  the love for you jumping     down the clear shaft of  your eye      you would not know how long I      paused when writing this unless               I said so in the poem               half an hour staring               at the pencil having       written of  my enemy with       love and fight to maintain                             the ascension                             voices from a                              room no one exits                              we pry genocide out                             of  the museum but                             meant to remove                            the museum                              from genocide
~~~
Lapo Elkman gazes out from the frame with a
come-hither look. His wrists have soft bracelets
around them & his shirt, black, is open.
Looped on his neck pale strands of beads hang
which causes a ribbon of shadow at his nipple.
His facial hair, bleached by the sun, is brown-white.
Tatiana Santa Domingo wears a floral printed dress.
It is summer where she’s photographed or
warm enough for clothes that light. Earrings
perhaps of three golden hoops or two
hang obscured in the shade of her hair.
Her right cheek is touching the locks of
Bianca Brandolini d’Adda whose own dress
is dim purple satin. It has a
black strap of lace an inch thick
which, at her waist, intersects with another
lace band even thicker & full of arabesques
& Fleur De Lis. This lace
is just above her belly which is pressed
to the belly of Margherita Maccapani Missoni.
White, with faint, almost invisible as
flowers (maybe dots?) her sundress,
exposes her shoulder. The left one
is touching the patterned black stars on the silk frock
partly covered by spilling brown hair, at its longest end,
curled & falling from the head of Alexi Neideliski.
Andrea Stefanowicz Sabrier
lays on his belly wearing Ray-Bands
& is laughing. Beside him
on his back, with arm muscles
slightly swollen, hands clasped behind his head
& eyes closed Julio Mario Santo Domingo III
laughs as well. Both are in blue
jeans & t-shirts. Her blue & black checkered
flannel clad shoulder hovers over
the face of her sister whose cheek is buried
in wildflowers. Each wears a ring, one is
a cylinder of patterned white gold
the other, more baroque, appears Victorian
but isn’t wholly visible.
Olympia & Fiona Scarry are un-
comfortably positioned in these clothes
& rings. Olympia’s eyes are wide,
bright, but Fiona’s are so full of shadow
it seems they aren’t there which gives her
the look of the un-dead. White wife beater,
ample hair in his pits, crotch
the center of gravity here in this picture
Harry Morton is laying on a bed. One arm
behind his head it’s tattooed almost classically,
twice, with illegible symbols. His
slacks have grey stripes, they pour into a boot
pressed on the soft white sheet at the right
at the left sink into a blood-colored
comforter, velvet. The chocolate
toned pea-coat he’s wearing half-way
reveals a hand, it grips the hem
near the satin-coco lining. She has the
the face of a mermaid, & the eyes
Princess in her title, Elizabeth von Thurn und Taxis
looks poised before apporaching the coffin.
Count Gian Luca Passi de Preposulo is giddy & drenched
having waded in the sea in his button up clinging
his smile is one that gods give their children after
hooking up with mortals for the fix. On a half-pipe
ornate with graffiti the honorable Sophia
Fermor-Hesketh rests a skate-board on her knee
in black tights. She wears Docs. Her hair is blonde,
mostly covered by a hat her dress is lycra black this is
Madonna as eternal return. Yellow seal with
ingratiating smile, caterpillar-seal hybrid antennae
blue, markings pink, body yellow, silver
dolphin, dolphin with desert-camo designs &
dolphin dressed for jungle warfare these inflatables are
harbored at the edge of a pool in which Bianca
Brandolini D’Adda is floating on a sting-ray
shaped raft on her belly hands under her chin
three bracelets no bathing suit she’s swimming
in her dress which is soaked & her legs are
raised, ankles crossed this makes a diamond-
shape between with liquid topaz. He has
the cork in his teeth. In his left hand a half-
glass of red. He is looking away at invisible friends & the
ocean is beyond a grey mist with white
bands Carlo Mondavi has hair
that arcs at middle point a frozen cascade
beneath which at right we see his ear half
a sea-shell. The filigree is white, the
buttons white impacted silk, the dots silk
on sheer, on her blouse with short sleeves,
she is blonde, her brother blonde his shirt
white his scarf red she leans back on his chest
his hand over his heart he takes an oath, Alexandre
& Josephine de la Baume their lips closed
eyes cold, unexpressive & imposing. JFK
twice on a monitor his face & his back he
is speaking Jared Kushner looks relaxed there’s
a copy of the New York Observer on his knees
which are bent he sits up against a
wall smiles easily cropped black hair dark tie
& slacks & white shirts by a window in the
city. It’s a beach-house kitchen. Arnie Hammer’s
by the sink. The head of his acoustic guitar
nears its lip, & his ass sits near a rack where
dishes dry there is one tiny elegant hole
in his t-shirt, in his collar which is loose,
low, reveals his long neck & hairy chest.
The Corona in his right hand sweats. There is
white foam all over my face which began in
a canister, moved as blue-gel expelled by
air-pressure then diluted with water was smeared
on my cheeks, between my nose, lip
& down onto my chin. I am shaving naked I
have three rolls of fat each bigger than
the last. Looking in the mirror I cough, draw
the phlegm from my lungs with a suck roll
it onto my tongue stick my tongue out examine
phlegm’s color for blood but there’s none it’s like mud-
infused egg yolk. I spit it down into the sink with
the little hairs spiking the cream. The cigarette
pulls like a kite from her body on a long arm
suspended by wind. Her tea-cup she holds it waist
high & with one finger pins the fabric lightly
to the bottom of the saucer. The cigarette ash
is precarious her dress has five little shoelaces
white at sternum’s end. Margherita
Maccapani Missoni is happy. Sophia Barclay
has a grey cardigan under which she wears a Disney
dress. Hayley Bloomingdale is blonde she has
a kerchief on her head a thin slice of melon
in her fingers a white strand of pearls
her bangs are one soft shard that hook her chin.
She turns like she noticed us following her,
& ready with her smile meets our eyes Ivanka
Trump is moving, carefree, through the city. A young
Thomas Jefferson, Adrea Casiraghi stares proudly at the future
of the world & finds it splendid, brown hair cascading
over his wool grey coat his white shirt reveals his
marshmallow chest which contrasts with his granite
chin & jaw. Dasha Duhkohva reclines on a
marble table outlined by hydrangeas in jeans &
striped shirt a grey trench coat thrown over her body.
In a little row-boat, in a tank-top
across which in marker has been written River
Keeper Amanda Hearst crowned by a loose,
densely beaded tiara. Black rubber fishing
boots swallowed her legs. She’s drawing an
enormous black tarp around her torso
& smiling while her head tilts to the left.
~~~
Six years ago, the big museum sold eight famous paintings
to purchase, for unspecified millions,
Gustave Caillebotte’s Man at His Bath.
Now it’s hip to have a print of it,
and whenever I see one hung for decoration,
I’m almost certain that this is what Caillebotte
had in mind when he broke out the oils
in 1884: some twenty-first-century bitch in Boston
catching a glimpse of a framed reproduction,
recollecting a study about how washing oneself may induce
a sense of culpability. What I remember
is he insisted I clean before leaving. That, and he was
trying to be dreamlike. He took my jaw in his hand
and said in the next life, we’ll really be together,
and the clamp in his voice made me almost
certain he knew something I did not. Now I eat right,
train hard, get my shots. This life — I’m angling
to remain in this life as long as I can, being almost
certain, as I am, what’s after — 
~~~
I am trying to remember the lyrics of old songs
                                                            I’ve forgotten, mostly
I am trying to remember one-hit wonders, hymns,
                                              and musicals like West Side Story.
Singing over and over what I can recall, I hum remnants on
                                                             buses and in the car.
 
I am so often alone these days with echoes of these old songs
                                                          and my ghosted lovers.
I am so often alone that I can almost hear it, can almost feel
                                                        the half-touch of others,
can almost taste the licked clean spine of the melody I’ve lost.
 
I remember the records rubbed with static and the needle
                                                                     gathering dust.
I remember the taste of a mouth so sudden and still cold from
                                                                         wintry gusts.
It seemed incredible then — a favorite song, a love found.
                                                                It wasn't, after all.
 
Days later, while vacuuming, the lyrics come without thinking.
Days later, I think I see my old lover in a café but don’t,
                                                                        how pleasing
it was to think it was him, to finally sing that song.
 
This is the way of all amplitude: we need the brightness
                                                                         to die some.
This is the way of love and music: it plays like a god and
                                                                       then is done.
Do I feel better remembering, knowing for certain
                                                                       what’s gone?
~~~
Did you know there were hundreds of little
night moths
crowded against the window pane
to catch a glimmer of light?
 
It was the scent of a strange perfume,
from fallen cocoons, sticky sincerity
that made them flee.
 
In this world of protected ruins,
in this circular world
where people tell
and re-tell the same stories,
in this world where people forgot
that the dyke
wouldn't be massive enough to hold back
the sea swell;
in this world where each and every one
would flee in panic in the end;
even the old lady sold
spun silver birds
while she whispered...
 
The tiny, translucent and elegant
night moths
like freshly picked pumpkin seeds
crowded in the corner of that half-open window
clinging to the cold glass,
light eager,
while the vapor filled the room
reaching the nostrils
of colleagues
 
who didn't recognize each other
but intertwining their fingers,
waited for someone else's words
to atone
and explain
and bestow
meaning to words.
~~~
Question: Can you tell us about what he is wearing?
Well, the hooves represent the deer’s hooves,
the red scarf represents the flowers from which he ate,
the shawl is for skin.
The cocoons make the sound of the deer walking on leaves and grass.
Listen.
Question: What is that he is beating on?
It’s a gourd drum. The drum represents the heartbeat of the deer.
Listen.
When the drum beats, it brings the deer to life.
We believe the water the drum sits in is holy. It is life.
Go ahead, touch it.
Bless yourself with it.
It is holy. You are safe now.
Question: How does the boy become a dancer?
He just knows. His mother said he had dreams when he was just a little boy.
You know how that happens. He just had it in him.
Then he started working with older men who taught him how to dance.
He has made many sacrifices for his dancing even for just a young boy.
The people concur, “Yes, you can see it in his face.”
Question: What do they do with the money we throw them?
Oh, they just split it among the singers and dancer.
They will probably take the boy to McDonald’s for a burger and fries.
The men will probably have a cold one.
It’s hot today, you know.