
~~~
for John Ashbery



“Good Barber of the Pea!” I exhumed,
high into the vag
where the barber keeps his
pea—
 
“Good Sprout!” His mouth, his gray
and hunted tongue
always in the distance—
"No use denying
we master the particular service
we deny ourselves. In the shade of this pea
(the sum of his shade and the gavel
flexing above his head)
I will become
a milliner to cover what work I’ve
done. Or else, I’ll begin anew
 
at the infant chin,
where nothing grows but chins! 
Outside, snails, vines, surpass me
and must—gaining pews upon
pews. But don’t think for a sec
I don’t know the way out of here, that release is
one hair—spiral stair—top of which
cleavage evaporates”
~~~
Don’t bother the earth spirit who lives here. She is working on a story. It is the oldest story in the world and it is delicate, changing. If she sees you watching she will invite you in for coffee, give you warm bread, and you will be obligated to stay and listen. But this is no ordinary story. You will have to endure earthquakes, lightning, the deaths of all those you love, the most blinding beauty. It’s a story so compelling you may never want to leave; this is how she traps you. See that stone finger over there? That is the only one who ever escaped.
~~~
Sorrento, at night the long fingers of your orange lights
Prick me in the sizzling streets, where the pinnacles
Of other people ring tinny and papier-mâché. Is this the way
Up to the murderous cliff? It’s most important that I get there
And leave no witness. Ah, is this the majolica medallion
Which marks the grave of girl abducted by a stallion
Whom she gave a lump of maple sugar?
                                                                               For that was in an autumn,
The time of year when young girls get hopeless and feel like
Giving it all away, the way a matronly merchant
Might brush off her lap, at the iron end of the market day:
It’s over, it’s worthless, without deserving and without
Purpose have I nourished this hope in my small patch of earth,
A sickly weed whose nodding sun’s gone nova.
 
~~~
We came so trustingly, for love, but these   
Lowlands, flatlands, near beneath the sea   
Point with their cautionary bones of sand   
To exorcize, submerge us; we stay free   
Only as mermaids glittering in the waves:   
Mermaids of the imagination, young   
A spring ago, who know our loveliness   
Banished, like fireflies at winter’s breath,   
Because none saw; these vines about our necks   
We placed in welcome once, but now as wreath   
Against the scalpel cold; still cold creeps in   
To grow like ivy over our chilling bodies   
Into our blood. Now in our diamond dress   
We wive only the sequins of the sea.   
The lowlands have rejected us. They lie   
Athwart the whispering waters like a scar   
On a mirage of glass; the dooming land,   
Where nothing can take root but frost, has won.   
And what of warmth and what of joy? They are   
Sequestered elsewhere, southward, where the sun   
Speaks. For all our mermaid vigilance   
And balance, all goes under; underneath   
The land’s gray wave we falter and fall back   
To hibernate within the caves of death.
~~~
From a story of how the tobacco plant came to our people, told to me by my cousin George Coser Jr.



It was way back, before there was a way back
When time threaded earth and sky.
Children were conceived, were born, grew, and walked tall
In what we now call a day.
There must have been two suns, a bright moon, somehow
We had more light than now, sheen
Of falling in love playing about Earth’s body
In a wild flicker which lit
Us up. We who were this planet and yearned for touch.
Every planted thought grew plant
Ladders to the stars, way back, before there was
No way back, Miss Mary Mack.
We used to sing along the buttons of her
Dress. Our babies are always
Our babies. Even back then when time waved through
The corn. We knew our plants like
Relatives. Their stories were our stories, there
Were songs for everything — I
Should say “are” songs for every transformation
They link between way back and
Now, the forever now, a time when a young
Mvskoke man and woman
Walked through the shimmer of the early evening.
They had become as one song.
They lay down when it was dark. I can hear their
Intimate low-voice talking.
How they tease one another with such gut love.
Earth makes a bed, with pillow
Mounds. And it is there as the night insects sing
They conceived their first child. They
Will look back as they walk East toward the sunrise.
The raw stalks of beginning
Will drink the light, root deeply dark into earth.
In the tracks of their loving
The plant-child emerges, first the seed head, then
Leafy, long male body and the white female
Flowers of tobacco, orHece, as the people called it when it called
To them. Come here. We were brought
To you from those who love you. We will help you.
~~~
     for Robert Payne



Great Alexander sailing was from his true course turned
By a young wind from a cloud in Asia moving
Like a most recognizable most silvery woman;
Tall Alexander to the island came.
The small breeze blew behind his turning head.
He walked the foam of ripples into this scene.
 
The trunk of the speaking tree looks like a tree-trunk
Until you look again.     Then people and animals
Are ripening on the branches;     the broad leaves
Are leaves;     pale horses, sharp fine foxes
Blossom;     the red rabbit falls
Ready and running.     The trunk coils, turns,
Snakes, fishes.     Now the ripe people fall and run,
Three of them in their shore-dance, flames that stand
Where reeds are creatures and the foam is flame.
 
Stiff Alexander stands.     He cannot turn.
But he is free to turn : this is the speaking tree,
It calls your name.     It tells us what we mean.
~~~
The best game the fairies play,
    The best game of all,
Is sliding down steeples—
    (You know they’re very tall).
You fly to the weathercock,
    And when you hear it crow,
You fold your wings and clutch your things
    And then let go!
They have a million other games—
    Cloud-catching’s one,
And mud-mixing after rain
    Is heaps and heaps of fun;
But when you go and stay with them
    Never mind the rest,
Take my advice—they’re very nice,
    But steeple-sliding’s best!
~~~
In the next room, Peter’s gloved hands crack
cordoned-off spines: he has been granted
permission, his agent’s call his pedigree.
So the tour itself is only the docent and me.
He is docile, eager to please, leads me
up the stairs and takes me to the bed.The coverlet is authentic, he says.
He lectures me on the heating system, offers
an anecdote of a broken casserole, recites
all of the Welty lore he has rehearsed.
She taught him when he was young, and now
he serves her legend, lets me lean in
toward the books—I cross the line
of what’s allowed, never touching.
He shows me photos—two loves lost, one
a married man—then on the way down,
pauses before a feather in a box,
reciting Yeats’s “Leda and the Swan.”
He begins to weep at Let her drop, adds,Like Welty’s loves! Now I stop—
is he comparing her to the god, or Leda?
He cannot bear her, her Unfulfilled Love.
I cannot bear this either—how dare he conjure up
for her such disappointment, such wasted longing?
I want to be the mirror of her photographs,
to be her figure of my own conjuring. I want
to believe I, too, could be happy here, in this
solitary house, in this small town, amidst
the rows and stacks of books. Untouched.
~~~
I. ANCIENT OVERTURE OF HÉ﻿RODIADE
 
The Nurse
 (Incantation)
 
Abolished, and her frightful wing in the tears
Of the basin, abolished, that mirrors forth our fears,
The naked golds lashing the crimson space,
An Aurora—heraldic plumage—has chosen to embrace
Our cinerary tower of sacrifice,
Heavy tomb that a songbird has fled, lone caprice
Of a dawn vainly decked out in ebony plumes…
Ah, mansion this sad, fallen country assumes!
No splashing! the gloomy water, standing still,
No longer visited by snowy quill
Or fabled swan, reflects the bereaving
Of autumn extinguished by its own unleaving,
Of the swan when amidst the cold white tomb
Of its feathers, it buried its head, undone
By the pure diamond of a star, but one
Of long ago, which never even shone.
 
Crime! torture! ancient dawn! bright pyre!
Empurpled sky, complicit in the mire,
And stained-glass windows opening red on carnage.
 
The strange chamber, framed in all the baggage
Of a warlike age, its goldwork dull and faint,
Has yesteryear’s snows instead of its ancient tint;
And its pearl-gray tapestry, useless creases
With the buried eyes of prophetesses
Offering Magi withered fingers. One,
With floral past enwoven on my gown
Bleached in an ivory chest and with a sky
Bestrewn with birds amidst the embroidery
Of tarnished silver, seems a phantom risen,
An aroma, roses, rising from the hidden
Couch, now void, the snuffed-out candle shrouds,
An aroma, over the sachet, of frozen golds,
A drift of flowers unfaithful to the moon
(Though the taper’s quenched, petals still fall from one),
Flowers whose long regrets and stems appear
Drenched in a lonely vase to languish there…
An Aurora dragged her wings in the basin’s tears!
 
Magical shadow with symbolic powers!
A voice from the distant past, an evocation,
Is it not mine prepared for incantation?
In the yellow folds of thought, still unexhumed,
Lingering, and like an antique cloth perfumed,
Spread on a pile of monstrances grown cold,
Through ancient hollows and through stiffened folds
Pierced in the rhythm of the pure lace shroud
Through which the old veiled brightness is allowed
To mount, in desperation, shall arise
(But oh, the distance hidden in those cries!)
The old veiled brightness of a strange gilt-silver,
Of the languishing voice, estranged and unfamiliar:
Will it scatter its gold in an ultimate splendor,
And, in the hour of its agony, render
Itself as the anthem for psalms of petition?
For all are alike in being brought to perdition
By the power of old silence and deepening gloom,
Fated, monotonous, vanquished, undone,
Like the sluggish waters of an ancient pond.
 
Sometimes she sang an incoherent song.
Lamentable sign!
                             the bed of vellum sheets,
Useless and closed–not linen!—vainly waits,
Bereft now of the cherished grammary
That spelled the figured folds of reverie,
The silken tent that harbored memory,
The fragrance of sleeping hair. Were these its treasure?
Cold child, she held within her subtle pleasure,
Shivering with flowers in her walks at dawn,
Or when the pomegranate’s flesh is torn
By wicked night! Alone, the crescent moon
On the iron clockface is a pendulum
Suspending Lucifer: the clepsydra pours
Dark drops in grief upon the stricken hours
As, wounded, each one wanders a dim shade
On undeciphered paths without a guide!
All this the king knows not, whose salary
Has fed so long this agèd breast now dry.
Her father knows it no more than the cruel
Glacier mirroring his arms of steel,
When sprawled on a pile of corpses without coffins
Smelling obscurely of resin, he deafens
With dark silver trumpets the ancient pines!
Will he ever come back from the Cisalpines?
Soon enough! for all is bad dream and foreboding!
On the fingernail raised in the stained glass, according
To the memory of the trumpets, the old sky burns,
And to an envious candle it turns
A finger. And soon, when the sad sun sinks,
It shall pierce through the body of wax till it shrinks!
No sunset, but the red awakening
Of the last day concluding everything
Struggles so sadly that time disappears,
The redness of apocalypse, whose tears
Fall on the child, exiled to her own proud
Heart, as the swan makes its plumage a shroud
For its eyes, the old swan, and is carried away
From the plumage of grief to the eternal highway
Of its hopes, where it looks on the diamonds divine
Of a moribund star, which never more shall shine!
~~~
The Inaccessible Island Rail lives in Atlantis,
with two black feet on the black plateau.
It might be slight, it might be shabby,
but it knows what it knows.
Rain falls from the sky.
The sun shines, within limits.
Wind blows in from the furthest west.
There is nothing beyond the cliffs.
Island Cape Myrtle is not true myrtle.
It is not the one in the myths.
Wind-stunted trees fill the fern-bush heath.
Sweet Roman Myrtle, True Roman Myrtle. Lies beyond the cliffs.
What there is is sparse.
It is made of grass and ferns.
The birds fill what they can with themselves and fledglings
in boulders that lightning burned.
They eat beetles, flies, moths.
They become what comes of trying.
The downy undersides of the leaves, they take it.
Until they can’t. They take to flying.
Trying, the wind does what it can.
In time the strangest things occur.
The tunnel finds itself inside the grass, and eggs
of milk, of lavender.
~~~
Therefore, no more recounting of dreams, a routine thing
that bores with expectations of invention, unfiltered
non sequiturs, unusual embraces
only from the practiced
young woman who everyday remembers
being a bride, she is changing behind that white curtain
Leora
fifteen again experiencing
prematurely the pure suckling of a baby
fifteen with a virgin desire for pure suckling
something to do with jasmine
with jasmine tea
existing only without accident
It blooms while Leora sleeps
when she sleeps at night and it is also dark
for the jasmine
four hours
of tea sucking on blossoms, Cestrum nocturnum like
colostrums: the earliest secretions, and then only milk
from mother
—there it is
seven times over
jasmine bath after jasmine bath
till the tea can get no better
highest grade as stasis
all As
gets so boring, ka-put
to the test of innovation
all the right answers
Leora
sees herself mermaid, eel, tiger
fish from waist down
form-fitting skirt of winks
under that bonefish or ladyfish profile: tail fins
already split, caught in transition from legs to fin
hybrid mutant bastard mestizo mulatto masala mule mix mutt
hm/bm/mmmmm
watered down (jasmine bath tea)
spiked (jasmine bath tea)
stands taller on tips of split tail fin
ps: pastiche, salmagundi when all dressed up
Leg and fin share custody
so young men sacrifice only below the belt
to please her
many wounded soldiers
her company
From now on storming the beaches
rocks already aftermath, the breaking of dozens of sphinxes
the taming of sandstone lions and griffins, gargoyles
Leora takes to breast anything capable of sucking
and being filled, no ban on leeches and vipers
that stick out like misplaced overdeveloped hairs
and while in position, her free hand
shaves the heads of Medusa’s children screaming
for more nursing
with her eyes closed, her free handy blade, sharpened
life line
The liquids of history therefore tend to ferment; the beverages for walks down
memory lane therefore become pungent cheeses and wines, the odes
to bitterness and sweetness happen. This is also desirable. Taste depends
on how the glass tilts, how tongue curls.
What’s difficult
is maintaining gaps as gaps. A sustainable nothingness.
But something enters. Sustainable nothingness
looks like a niche.
Ghosts and spirits of what’s been lost. A young woman looks over her shoulder.
Close watching of what’s fading does not mean the change from substance to spirit
would be observed. On the tippy-tips of split tail fin looking over her shoulder
a long line for the nurse, exceptional business, nonstop nursing
and the milk won’t stop, years are at the end of the line.
Pull the plug on a nearby respirator (how on earth?)
        (don’t assume location, location, location)
the substance travels the line
joins the community of electricity, colonies of gigantic storms
on the sun
and appearances in auroras
that the mermaid sits under as under any canopy
nonstop
The spell of the tide tailored to make the one falling under its influence fall more
willingly. It feels nothing like falling at all: Leora describes rehabilitation
Sand sparkles remembering having been alive
only once
Leora’s eyes
sparkle upon contact with crabs and their incredible redness
that ought to teach her something about fire she does not know
with top-heavy ways
of knowing
      (the brain should travel the stations of the body, and one day
       the eyes and navel, when the eyes accompany the brain,
       line up in a row)
                               —then a real reason for revisionDream on 
Accordingly, pureness of the situation milks its own purity
Fantastic and looks disgusting
        (no matter where the eyes are—candidate
         for truth)
but purity is still pure following
such a milking
The mermaid’s pregnancy has to be called immaculate after repeated searches for the
limits. Lost without those. Pure. Last resort and best explanation for birth of a human
baby from a mermaid without a human pelvis or womb. The best xrays
cannot find them. Machines arrive on the beach and leave defective.
Leora
continues nursing
her baby first in line
The milk is pure. It does not need to be pasteurized. Makes                               (empty)
no one ill. Nothing in it allows allergies. The chemistry                                       (empty)
of the milk is pure.                                                                                         (empty)
The molecules of the tabernacle of purity.
              (as if they are empty)                                                                  (nothing is right
                                                                                                                               here)
Law
Flattened out they are like flattened tetrahedrons,
probably are smashed pendulums
now
Leora
blessed
with impossibility of the usual kind of rape
her own brand
jasmine bath after jasmine bath
without legs
she does as much sitting
as anyone who ever sat on a throne
wheelchairs
keep evolving
 
~~~
Little soul,
you have wandered
lost a long time.
The woods all dark now,
birded and eyed.
Then a light, a cabin, a fire, a door standing open.
The fairy tales warn you:
Do not go in,
you who would eat will be eaten.
You go in. You quicken.
You want to have feet.
You want to have eyes.
You want to have fears.
~~~
In Legends of the Jews, Lewis Ginzberg writes that an Egyptian princess hung a tapestry woven with diamonds and pearls above King Solomon’s bed. When the king wanted to rise, he thought he saw stars and, believing it was night, slept on.



Scaling ladders with buckets of white enamel,
I painted the stars and the moon on my windowpanes   
to hold back days and nights. I yanked the telephone
and stopped the wooden clock. The weeks a lightning stroke,   
desire turned to love. With my blue diamond,
I sliced minutes in half and made days vanish,
fooling the hours.
                           I became so skillful   
at firmaments that miracles occurred:
a bearded comet moved across the room   
breeding no omens, tearing no major kingdoms   
into small provinces, but there it was,   
reminding us that rock may spin and flare,   
lifting the senses, burning into sight.
You eased pale hands away; I saw your shoulders   
recede through doorways, watched your image fail   
with your famished smile. I left our room
with dream-filled eyes, and standing in the sun,   
I gazed at bricks and glass and saw, suddenly,   
flashing in stony light, the stars and the moon.
~~~
The Mayor of Scuttleton burned his nose Trying to warm his copper toes; He lost his money and spoiled his will By signing his name with an icicle-quill; He went bare-headed, and held his breath, And frightened his grandame most to death; He loaded a shovel, and tried to shoot, And killed the calf in the leg of his boot; He melted a snow-bird, and formed the habit Of dancing jigs with a sad Welsh rabbit; He lived on taffy, and taxed the town; And read his newspaper upside down; Then he sighed, and hung his hat on a feather, And bade the townspeople come together; But the worst of it all was, nobody knew What the Mayor of Scuttleton next would do. 
~~~
(A Reincarnation Phantasy)



This was the story never told
By one who cared not for the world’s gold.
One of the idle and wise,
A beggar with unfathomable eyes.
One who had nothing but dreams to give
To men who are eager to labour and live.
For the world in its wisdom deep and dim
Had taken all pleasure and treasure from him.
This was the story his soul could tell,
Immortal and unfathomable.
There was no record in his brain,
He did not know he should live again.
But there was one who read the whole,
Buried deep in a dead man’s soul.
“In the days of Atlantis, under the wave,
I was a slave, the child of a slave.
When the towers of Atlantis fell,
I died and was born again in hell.
From that sorrowful prison I did escape
And hid myself in a hero’s shape.
But few years had I of love or joy,
A Trojan I fell at the Siege of Troy.
I came again in a little while,
An Israelite slave on the banks of the Nile.
Then did I comfort my grief-laden heart.
With the magic lore and Egyptian art.
Fain was I to become Osiris then,
But soon I came back to the world of men.
By the Ganges I was an outcast born,
A wanderer and a child of scorn.
By the Waters of Babylon I wept,
My harp amongst the willows slept.
In the land of Greece I opened my eyes,
To reap the fields of Plotinus the Wise.
When the great light shattered the world’s closed bars,
I was a shepherd who gazed at the stars.
For lives that were lonely, obscure, apart,
I thank the Hidden One, in my heart,
That always and always under the sun
I went forth to battle and never won.
A slayer of men, I was doomed to abide,
For ever and aye, on the losing side.
Whenever. I dream of the wonderful goal,
I thank the hidden God in my soul
That though I have always been meanly born,
A tiller of earth and a reaper of corn,
Whenever through ages past and gone
The light divine for a moment shone,
Whenever piercing laborious night
A ray fell straight from the Light of Light,
Whenever amid fierce, lightning and storm
The divine moved in a human form,
Whenever the earth in her cyclic course
Shook at the touch of an unknown force,
Whenever the cloud of dull years grew thin
And a great star called to the light within,
I have braved storm and labour and sun
To stand at the side that Holy One.
No matter how humble my birth has been,
There are few who have seen what I have seen.
Mine the shepherd’s star and the reaper’s reward,
And the dream of him who fell by the sword.
One thing I have learned the long years through,
To know the false words from the true.
The slave who toiled on the banks of the Nile
With wisdom gladdened his long exile.
From Buddha at eve by the Ganges’ side
An outcast learnt the worth of the world’s pride.
To the tired reaper, when day was done,
Did Plotinus unveil the hidden sun.
Amongst the stars, on a Syrian night,
A ragged shepherd found the Light of Light.
From dream to dream, o’er valley and hill,
I followed the Lord Christ's wandering will.
Kings there are who would barter a throne
For the long day’s toil and the light unknown,
The deed of the strong and the word of the wise,
And the night under cold and starry skies—
The white light of dawn on the hillside shed
On Him who had nowhere to lay His head.
Behold there are kings who would change with me,
For the love of the ancient mystery.
Shepherd and reaper and slave I have been,
There are few who have seen what I have seen.
I have been a gipsy since those days,
And lived again in the wild wood ways.
Wise with the lore of those hidden things,
Learnt from Lord Christ in His wanderings,
Beggar and reaper and shepherd and slave,
I am one who rests not in any grave;
I will follow each stormy light divine,
And the secret of all things shall be mine.
These things have I seen, would you bid me mourn
That I was never an Emperor born?”
~~~
it doesn’t matter when I cross.
two seconds and they’re gone.
the ferry facing Ulus. the trees
that spanked of green. the narrow
bags of temples. beyond that –
just – these Peri scenes
 
            when the human body sweats             the skin produce an oil
 
            when Peri bodies sweat            it does not produce the oil
 
the ropes fall to the pavement
their waters slap me still
their green glow sweats
into the pavement waters
slap me still –
 
            I could curl among the roses
             I would make an aqualung
 
we will reach the edge of this walk soon.
all lights torn out for fuel.
 
            move my fingers in the dark
 
awoke without a start.
Peri here – my name is Peri –
 
my name is Perihan
~~~
Spring comes little, a little. All April it rains.
The new leaves stick in their fists; new ferns still fiddleheads.
But one day the swifts are back. Face to the sun like a child
You shout, 'The swifts are back!'
Sure enough, bolt nocks bow to carry one sky-scyther
Two hundred miles an hour across fullblown windfields.Swereee swereee. Another. And another.
It's the cut air falling in shrieks on our chimneys and roofs.
The next day, a fleet of high crosses cruises in ether.
These are the air pilgrims, pilots of air rivers.
But a shift of wing, and they're earth-skimmers, daggers
Skilful in guiding the throw of themselves away from themselves.
Quick flutter, a scimitar upsweep, out of danger of touch, for
Earth is forbidden to them, water's forbidden to them,
All air and fire, little owlish ascetics, they outfly storms,
They rush to the pillars of altitude, the thermal fountains.
Here is a legend of swifts, a parable —
When the Great Raven bent over earth to create the birds,
The swifts were ungrateful. They were small muddy things
Like shoes, with long legs and short wings,
So they took themselves off to the mountains to sulk.
And they stayed there. 'Well,' said the Raven, after years of this,
'I will give you the sky. You can have the whole sky
On condition that you give up rest.'
'Yes, yes,' screamed the swifts, 'We abhor rest.
We detest the filth of growth, the sweat of sleep,
Soft nests in the wet fields, slimehold of worms.
Let us be free, be air!'
So the Raven took their legs and bound them into their bodies.
He bent their wings like boomerangs, honed them like knives.
He streamlined their feathers and stripped them of velvet.
Then he released them, Never to Return 
Inscribed on their feet and wings. And so
We have swifts, though in reality, not parables but
Bolts in the world's need: swift
Swifts, not in punishment, not in ecstasy, simply
Sleepers over oceans in the mill of the world's breathing.
The grace to say they live in another firmament.
A way to say the miracle will not occur,
And watch the miracle.
~~~
We were made to understand it would be
Terrible. Every small want, every niggling urge,
Every hate swollen to a kind of epic wind. 
 
Livid, the land, and ravaged, like a rageful 
Dream. The worst in us having taken over 
And broken the rest utterly down. 
 
                                                                 A long age 
Passed. When at last we knew how little 
Would survive us—how little we had mended 
 
Or built that was not now lost—something 
Large and old awoke. And then our singing 
Brought on a different manner of weather. 
 
Then animals long believed gone crept down 
From trees. We took new stock of one another. 
We wept to be reminded of such color. 
 
~~~
She awoke   
to find her fishtail   
clean gone   
but in the bed with her   
were two long, cold thingammies.   
You'd have thought they were tangles of kelp   
or collops of ham.
"They're no doubt   
taking the piss,   
it being New Year's Eve.   
Half the staff legless   
with drink   
and the other half   
playing pranks.   
Still, this is taking it   
a bit far."
And with that she hurled
the two thingammies out of the room.
But here's the thing   
she still doesn't get—
why she tumbled out after them   
arse-over-tip...
How she was connected   
to those two thingammies   
and how they were connected   
to her.
It was the sister who gave her the wink
and let her know what was what.
"You have one leg attached to you there   
and another one underneath that.   
One leg, two legs...
A-one and a-two...
Now you have to learn   
what they can do."
In the long months   
that followed,   
I wonder if her heart fell
the way her arches fell,
her instep arches.
~~~
The spell is a mouth’sperilous-o as they dark circle the boats intheir most resplendent pliable armor.The concept fish aligning with girlor love with deathto bring down men at sea, temptationconfused into offering,the mismatch of like plus unlikereally likes, straight to rock bottom.No equation has ever been this badass.It’s the men who will enter the spellso far into exhaustion as weather, as waves,the tide pulling toward if, letting go thenover the whale road in the company ofthe dolphin, the only other animal, I’m told,who can do it solely for pleasure. It.You know what I mean. The lower halfaglitter, the top half brainy as beautifulis sometimes, murderous lovelies, their plottingand resolve and why notget these guys good, the lechers.To see at all in the whirling, to hearwhat anyone mightin wind roar and faint whistle — don’t worry about girls shrewdas whimsy, legend-toughto the core. Don’t. But it’stheir spell too, isn’t it? Locked there.Aligned with singing, dazzlerazor-blackened green. Not that theymiss what human is like or know any endto waters half born to, from wherethey look up.Men in boats, so sick of the journey.Men gone stupid with blue,with vast, with gazing over and awaythe whole time until same to same-old tonow they’re mean. After that, small.Out there, the expanse. In here,the expanse. The men look down. Achingmisalignment — gorgeouslure that hides its hook steely sweetto o my god, little fool’s breathtriumphant, all the way under and am Inot deserving?
~~~
The glassy hill I clomb for thee



For surefooted step, hooves behoove the haver. The sky redid blue, the woman wavered,and the black bull (the vanquisher), vanished.She called out to nothing, and in vain shed tears until she reached the glass hill’s impasse. Served her standard fairy tale penance, passim,served her seven to be given ironshoes to — at last — scale the hill, the earnedneared end. Each step conquered territory,at last, the sleeping prince-once-bull, torrid tearing of clothes, tearing on one’s clothes, three nights of thisuntil the prince awakes. How she, exhausted,must have felt in the at long last, the ever after.Happily, I guess, but a long time until laughter.
~~~
It is eighty degrees in December.
It is he, on one of his furloughs,
bringing himself — and hell — up to date.My Don Juan, the better climber
(as the mercury yo-yos),is in a newly roused state,
the world circumcised away
from an out-of-season bud
leaving at the scrupulous rim,as it unfurls, a darker appliqué,
like O-positive frozen solidat the sight of one’s resuscitated victim.
This rosebush assiduously forks over
its works where most grandifloras falter,
thriving as far into the year as Capricorn.While named after a lover,
it decorates its own altarand wields an extraordinary thorn:
once I saw it catch a football
in those semiquaver quasi-teeth;
it is three-headed, like Cerberus,a hybrid drawing bloodlines from a root-ball
on hands all that’s impure lies beneath.Hands can train it, barbarous
as it is, on an arbor, and I might like
to take its thick canes in harness,
first pouring cement as a base(so it would know I meant business).
Always poised to strike,they eventually undo their stays,
baying out like a window
of garnet, as at Chartres
(torture chamber in its basement,or so I hear). I wonder how
such a daemon rose got its start,what fairy tale explains its scent    ...    
And then I go out tonight
and find him, swiping right
on every pretty face in candlelight.It is almost Christmas. Stacks
of square plates. (It’s an open plan.) Racksof bottles. The whites and blacks,
clear glass, and stainless steel sieves
denote compliance with standards.
A wire basket of freckled pearsis transparency; sterilized knives
give full disclosure; and as regardsthe stemware, due diligence dares
a slip, especially on chanteuses like these
salting down from state-of-the-art speakers.
(Or is it sugar?) Does the chorizo flambénot deter him? Gold as all hell, Valkyries
stand tall with beer to the brim. Beakersin Siren form flush with Chianti, if not ambi-
valence. Recalling the steel meshes
belting Monterosso’s
cliffs against the voxDei of the sea, the myth refleshes:
ordering, in the manner of heroes,an Andromeda on the rocks.
~~~
There once lived a great king whose twin wives could bear him no children. A wandering sage saw the king’s grief and offered him a magical mango. She who ate the mango would be with child. As he had two wives, the king cut the mango into two perfect halves and offered one half to each wife. After nine months, each wife gave birth to one lifeless half. Horrified, the king ordered these clots of flesh to be left in the forest. A wandering demon found the two lifeless halves and cupped one in each palm. When she brought them together, the two halves fused and a whole child was made in front of her eyes—the demon named the child Jarasandha.
Years passed by and this child grew to be an intimidating and invincible warrior. In a fight with Bhim, an equally invincible warrior, Jarasandha was ripped in half by his enemy. But, each time he was ripped apart, his halves found a way to meet up and become whole. Krishna, who witnessed how Jarasandha’s flesh found its own way back to flesh, motioned to his own cousin with his fingers: toss the halves of his body in opposite directions, he
suggested.
So, when Bhim ripped Jarasandha apart once again, he swung his left half to the right side of the arena and his right half to the left. And his body found no way to return to itself.
In the Toronto airport, where I’ve arrived for a conference, I watch an older Punjabi lady—made to sit in a wheelchair behind two lines of customs officials, a security guard, a translator, and a service-staff member—scream that her son is outside the airport may she please just go tell him she is here she is here she is here please. I stand there holding her hand, my own luggage reluctantly traveling in loops on the belt. Beta—child— she says to me: please tell them my son is here and I am here what is the problem let me go let me go to him.
~~~
Sir Charles into my chamber coming in,When I was writing of my ‘Fairy Queen;’‘I pray’—said he—‘when Queen Mab you do seePresent my service to her Majesty:And tell her I have heard Fame's loud reportBoth of her beauty and her stately court.’When I Queen Mab within my fancy viewed,My thoughts bowed low, fearing I should be rude;Kissing her garment thin which fancy made,I knelt upon a thought, like one that prayed; And then, in whispers soft, I did presentHis humble service which in mirth was sent;Thus by imagination I have beenIn Fairy court and seen the Fairy Queen.
~~~
Oh, I said, this is going to be.
And it was.
Oh, I said, this will never happen.
But it did.
And a purple fog descended upon the land.
The roots of trees curled up.
The world was divided into two countries.
Every photograph taken in the first was of people.
Every photograph taken in the second showed none.
All of the girl children were named And.
All of the boy children named Then.
~~~
When the strange girl skips rope her hair flies
like a porpoise. She collects things that melt
and things that tick, circles and cubes
and checkerboards in a drawer
 
she can pull out from her navel.
Other children, alerted by the rumble
of marbles in her chest, chase her
across the field. She insists she is only
 
hungry, but they pin her down and open her
up. Cockroaches rush out and bullies run
and squeal, crushing carapaces underfoot.
She gathers as many as she can,
 
tells them she’s sorry there is no lock. She’s sorry,
but good children shouldn’t have secrets.
 
~~~
You can’t begin just anywhere. It’s a wreck.
                                                                                       Shrapnel and the eye
Of a house, a row of houses. There’s a rat scrambling
From light with fleshy trash in its mouth. A baby strapped to its mother’s back
Cut loose.                                                                     Soldiers crawl the city,
The river, the town, the village,
                                      The bedroom, our kitchen. They eat everything.
Or burn it.
They kill what they cannot take. They rape. What they cannot kill they take.
Rumors fall like rain.
                                     Like bombs.
                 Like mother and father tears swallowed for restless peace.                                     Like sunset slanting toward a moonless midnight.
Like a train blown free of its destination.         Like a seed fallen where
There is no chance of trees                 or anyplace       for birds to live.No, start here.                           Deer peer from the edge of the woods.
                                                                        We used to see woodpeckers
The size of the sun, redbirds, and were greeted
                                          By chickadees with their good morning songs.
We’d started to cook outside slippery with dew and laughter, ah those smoky sweet sunrises.
We tried to pretend war wasn’t going to happen.
Though they began building their houses all around us and demanding  more.
They started teaching our children their god’s story,
                                                               A story in which we’d always be slaves.No. Not here.
You can’t begin here.
This is memory shredded because it is impossible to hold by words, even poetry.
~~~
The princess in her world-old tower pined
A prisoner, brazen-caged, without a gleam
Of sunlight, or a windowful of wind;
She lived but in a long lamp-lighted dream.
They brought her forth at last when she was old;
The sunlight on her blanched hair was shed
Too late to turn its silver into gold.
“Ah, shield me from this brazen glare!” she said.
~~~
When the moon’s worn scutcheon touches the flint-gray flood,I will lave him in foxglove and vetch until the bloodof his wretched heart heals.Without a scar, he stood—as the men make their way into the quaking wood.
~~~
Switzerland, 1920



Dear Friend, “Called away” from my country,
I square the egg and put it in a letter
that all may read, gilding each word a little
so that touched, it yields to a secret
stirring, a small gold bird on a spring
suddenly appearing to sing a small song
of regret, elation, that overspills all private
bounds, although you ask, as I do, what now
do we sing to, sing for? Before the Great War,
I made a diamond-studded coach three inches high
with rock crystal windows and platinum wheels
to ceremoniously convey a speechless egg to Court.
All for a bored Czarina! My version of history
fantastic and revolutionary as I reduced the scale
to the hand-held dimensions of a fairy tale,
hiding tiny Imperial portraits and cameos
in eggs of pearl and bone. Little bonbons, caskets!
The old riddle of the chicken and the egg
is answered thus: in the Belle Epoque
of the imagination, the egg came first, containing,
as it does, both history and uncertainty, my excesses
inducing unrest among those too hungry to see
the bitter joke of an egg one cannot eat.
Oblique oddity, an egg is the most beautiful of all
beautiful forms, a box without corners
in which anything can be contained, anything
except Time, that old jeweler who laughed
when he set me ticking. Here, among the clocks
and watches of a country precisely ordered
and dying, I am not sorry, I do not apologize.
Three times I kiss you in memory
of that first Easter, that first white rising,
and send this message as if it could save you:
Even the present is dead. We must live now
in the future. Yours, Fabergé.
~~~
Based on the Chinese myth of Chang’e



Saturday. The good bread set out for the dogs to eat.The rabbit hurt on milk & tall willows
that I’ve bound to storefront. The headlines saythe waves are coming in today. The waves
& spoiled fruit & all the lives I’ve wastedplaying archer. At least this side of the kingdom
will still love me. I pull the weeds. I pull the tides& storm the shores. The rabbit drops its mouth
into a crater. The waves overtake the red citywith spears in hand. June & the headlines
announce the end of the world. I am terribleat playing heroine. I’ve done all I can: plucked
the apples, swept the chimney. Washed the rabbit,saved the tortoise from its slow drowning.
~~~
A species of tiny human has been discovered, which lived on the remote Indonesian island of Flores just 18,000 years ago. . . . Researchers have so far unearthed remains from eight individuals who were just one metre tall, with grapefruit-sized skulls. These astonishing little people . . . made tools, hunted tiny elephants and lived at the same time as modern humans who were colonizing the area.
—Nature, October 2004



Light: lifted, I stretch my brief body.
Color: blaze of day behind blank eyes.
Sound: birds stab greedy beaks
Into trunk and seed, spill husk
Onto the heap where my dreaming
And my loving live.
Every day I wake to this.
Tracks follow the heavy beasts
Back to where they huddle, herd.
Hunt: a dance against hunger.
Music: feast and fear.
This island becomes us.
Trees cap our sky. It rustles with delight
In a voice green as lust. Reptiles
Drag night from their tails,
Live by the dark. A rage of waves
Protects the horizon, which we would devour.
One day I want to dive in and drift,
Legs and arms wracked with danger.
Like a dark star. I want to last.
~~~
It was the blind girl from the rez whostole the baker’s missing bread;it was the guitar playing fool who croonedand raced the wild mustangs through our heads.It was the village idiot who playedhis chess without the fool, the bowlof soup who said too late, too late, too lateto blame the thread, the spoon, the text, the mole.
~~~
i’d rather have
an agogô for a heart
a djembe for a heart
gramophone for a heart
bison bone for a heart
dandelion spore for a heart
sweet cream butter for a heart
i’d rather have a
mason jar for a heart
an ashtray for a heart
a plate of liver for a heart
lawnmower for a heart
jezebel for a heart
 
instead of this flesh & blood which mars my sheets
instead of this archive that clogs my toilet
instead of this flea-bitten attic full of raccoons
instead of this envelope that arrives already open
instead of this light bulb that rattles on the inside
instead of this tv box that draws attention on trash day
instead of this wart that only responds to rain
instead of this colander that never catches the grit
 
i’d rather have
a heart born of the lust
between a sonnet & a blues song
a coleridge-wild weed hoochie coochie heart
a we real cool heart aboard the impossible spawn of slave ships
an undying, maroon eternally brown in the black hills heart
i’d rather
have a heart that beats
that beats
that beats
that beats
that beats
 
~~~
If you go to bed hungry, your soul will get up and steal cold rice from the pot.
Stop playing with fire before the moon rises or you’ll pee in your sleep.
Sweeping the floor after dark sweeps wealth and good fortune out the door.
Fork dropped: a gentleman will visit. Spoon: a bashful lady.
Bathing after you’ve cooked over a hot stove makes the veins swell.
For safe passage to the guest who leaves mid-meal: turn your plate.
The adage goes: coffee stunts growth. Twelve grapes on New Year’s: the opposite.
Advice from the learned: hide a book under your pillow. Never step on. Never drop.
Every rice grain that remains on your plate you’ll meet again on the footpath
to heaven. You’ll have to stoop to pick each one of them up.
~~~
Two men share
one tooth. From
one tooth the men
predict the world.
Thank you! or
we would not exist.
Two men and one
tooth is not a problem.
One man is wide
and one man is sober.
Sometimes the men are
the same. Little tooth
is the light of the
orchard. From
it all things are
made up. Once
the two men lost
the tooth and every
one disappeared.
No one was angry
because no one was
there. The men
found the tooth
when the tooth
started laughing.
The men said what
is that noise and
the world came
back on. They told
the tooth that’s not
funny but it was
very funny. One
man swallowed
the tooth and put
on all the sad
knowledge.
He wanted to
punish the tooth
but the tooth
punished him. It
lasted three hours
and then he threw
up. The two men
live in a cave with
bay windows. To
be in love is so
solemn think the
two men once
a year. The tooth
never thinks any
thing. It is the
tooth of a goat.
~~~
    In Tamalpais is a big crystal. An acquaintance told
me the story. A Miwok was giving his grandfather’s medicine
bag to the Kroeber Museum in Berkeley. He said this man
took him over the mountain Tamalpais, at a certain time
in the year. I believe it was about the time of the
Winter Solstice, because then the tides are really low.
They stopped and gathered a certain plant on the way over
the mountain. On their way to the Bolinas Beach clam patch,
where there is a big rock way out there.
                                                                            Go out to
the rock. Take out of the medicine bag the crystal
that matches the crystal in Tamalpais. And
                                              if your heart is not true
                                              if your heart is not true
when you tap the rock in the clam patch
                                                            a little piece of it will fly off
                                                   and strike you in the heart
                          and strike you dead.
And that’s the first story I ever heard about Bolinas.
~~~
After Richard Siken



comes wave after wave after wave the derivative & harvest, the myrtle tops of sandstorms & milk glasses, apple, horse & song, list, listen, light leaks from the spaces between the bubbles — call it foam — tender pocket of yes yes yes call it flesh — eat tonight & you’ll still have to eat tomorrow, eat tonight & it still won’t be over — eat tonight: peaches bloom even in the dark, as wet as a girl — hands & feet, horse & song, the same hole bandaged over & over, not a wound but its absence — a sum of histories — the nights colliding like marbles, & if there is an end then it’s too dark to see, if there is an end then it’s too bright to see, hands folding, unfolding, & you, Scheherazade!, milky goddess of recursion, best DJ in the city, you spin records, spin heads, cross legs & cross deserts, & always pause just moments before he
~~~
In their proverbs, the Sumerians quoted Fox as saying — on having pissedinto the sea — All the ocean is now my urine! Now, hang on there girl.
I want to get a handle on your homeopathic incontinent ways,because I think you may be onto something. Firstly, what kind of fox
are you that approaches the shore; no hen house to bother, no bramblesto scoff? No line of emerald shit to booby-trap the garden with?
Perhaps wherever we are, you are; so why not the beach? What promisedid the salt ocean offer you, or appear to? Cured meat? Fish? After all,
once a month I know I reek gloriously of kelp — salt and iron and yeast — an umami feast for the brave, or weak. Or were you worrying seabirds
up on the cliff — stopped in your tracks, unable to resist. A little splish.The wind threshing your water as it fell — yellow, scattered, one or two
drops of which maybe reached. Or perhaps you were caught short,coy on the beach, and entered the surf for decorum’s sake. All over
the world, miles from the sea, girls caught between poor sanitaryprovision and a social imperative to be discreet ﬁnd themselves
in a dark place, their skirts about their waists. Maybe it wasthe king’s men that saw ﬁt to drive you into the sea. But clever,
resourceful, you just thumbed your nose and learned to swim.Paddled to safer land, much like we once did. Your charcoal paws
doggedly turning the cold pages of the sea. Pausing now and thento pee, a comforting cloud of heat. And which child among us hasn’t
cast their blessing on the waves? Sent into the surf  by mothers, which of ushasn’t rightfully claimed the ocean as our own, or in turn been claimed?
~~~
The kiss is, strictly speaking, a passingof of   twice: a bead from her mouth to his,then back, ad nauseam, and the boys who livedand died for it. The lovely girl amassingninety-nine spirits, and in high spiritsfor consuming her highest amount. Oncethe hundredth boy arrived she starts her huntin her haunt, a hill’s field filled with fittingArtemisia absinthium.
~~~
That day in December I sat down
by Miss Muffet of Montgomery.
I was myriad-weary. Feets swole
from sewing seams on a filthy fabric;
tired-sore a pedalin’ the rusty Singer; 
dingy cotton thread jammed in the eye.
All lifelong I’d slide through century-reams
loathsome with tears. Dreaming my own
silk-self. 
It was not like they all say. Miss Liberty Muffet
she didn’t
jump at the sight of me.
Not exactly.
They hauled me
away—a thousand kicking legs pinned down. 
The rest of me I tell you—a cloud.
Beautiful trouble on the dead December
horizon. Come to sit in judgment. 
How many miles as the Jim Crow flies?
Over oceans and some. I rumbled.
They couldn’t hold me down. Long.
No. 
My feets were tired. My eyes were
sore. My heart was raw from hemming
dirty edges of Miss L. Muffet’s garment.
I rode again. 
A thousand bloody miles after the Crow flies
that day in December long remembered when I sat down
beside Miss Muffet of Montgomery.
I said—like the joke say—What’s in the bowl, Thief?
I said—That’s your curse.
I said—This my way.
She slipped her frock, disembarked,
settled in the suburbs, deaf, mute, lewd, and blind.
The bowl she left behind. The empty bowl mine.
The spoiled dress. 
Jim Crow dies and ravens come with crumbs.
They say—Eat and be satisfied.
I fast and pray and ride.