Oh, but to fade, and live we know not where, To be a cold obstruction and to groan! This sensible, warm woman to become A prudish clod; and the delighted spirit To live and die alone, or to reside With married sisters, and to have the care Of half a dozen children, not your own; And driven, for no one wants you, Round the pendant world; or worse than worse Of those that disappointment and pure spite Have driven to madness: ’Tis too horrible! The weariest and most troubled married life That age, ache, penury, or jealousy Can lay on nature, is a paradise To being an old maid.   That very time I saw, (but thou couldst not,) Walking between the garden and the barn, Reuben, all armed; a certain aim he took At a young chicken standing by a post, And loosed his bullet smartly from his gun, As he would kill a hundred thousand hens. But I might see young Reuben’s fiery shot Lodged in the chaste board of the garden fence, And the domesticated fowl passed on, In henly meditation, bullet free.  My father had a daughter got a man, As it might be, perhaps, were I good-looking, I should, your lordship. And what’s her residence? A hut my lord, she never owned a house, But let her husband, like a graceless scamp, Spend all her little means,—she thought she ought,— And in a wretched chamber, on an alley, She worked like masons on a monument, Earning their bread. Was not this love indeed?
~~~
We are a sad people, without hats. The history of our nation is tragically benign. We like to watch the rabbits screwing in the graveyard. We are fond of the little bunny with the bent ear who stands alone in the moonlight reading what little text there is on the graves. He looks quite desirable like that. He looks like the center of the universe. Look how his mouth moves mouthing the words while the others are busy making more of him. Soon the more will ask of him to write their love letters and he will oblige, using the language of our ancestors, those poor clouds in the ground, beloved by us who have been standing here for hours, a proud people after all.
~~~
(a found poem, composed entirely of e-mails from various high school students)



If I were to ask you a question about your book
and sum it up into one word it would be, Why?
I think I like Walt Whitman better than you. I just don't
get literature, but for a fast hour and a half read, your book
 
takes the cake. I like how you organized the lines
in that one poem to represent a growing twisting bonsai tree.
Are you going to get a rude reaction when you meet
that one guy in that one poem? I guess you never know.
 
You are very young to be a poet. I also like how your poems take
up an entire page (it makes our reading assignment go faster).
In class we spend so much time dissecting your poems
and then deeply analyzing them. I think I like Walt Whitman
 
better than you, but don’t take offense—you are very good too!
You are young, You are young and pure and really just want
to have a good time. Thank you we have taken a debate
and you are a far better poet than Walt Whitman. And I loved
 
how your poems were easy to read and understand. Hello
my name is Alicia. We read you book and I just loved it.
We also read Walt Whitman’s Leaves of Grass. There
was no competition there. I liked your book a whole lot better.
 
It was an easy read. But poetry is not my favorite type
of literature. Sometimes I am offered drinks and guys
try to talk to me but I too just brush it off and keep dancing.
Every once and a while the creepy mean guys try to offer you
 
things and then they say something. What would you do?
Lastly, I was wondering if you ever wrote a poem that really
didn’t have a deeper meaning but everyone still tried
to give it one anyways? Walt Whitman is better than you.
~~~
There was once a little animal,
   No bigger than a fox,And on five toes he scampered
   Over Tertiary rocks.They called him Eohippus,
   And they called him very small,And they thought him of no value --
   When they thought of him at all;For the lumpish old Dinoceras
   And Coryphodon so slowWere the heavy aristocracy
   In days of long ago.Said the little Eohippus,
   “I am going to be a horse!And on my middle finger-nails
   To run my earthly course!I’m going to have a flowing tail!
   I’m going to have a mane!I’m going to stand fourteen hands high
   On the psychozoic plain!”The Coryphodon was horrified,
   The Dinoceras was shocked;And they chased young Eohippus,
   But he skipped away and mocked.Then they laughed enormous laughter,
   And they groaned enormous groans.And they bade young Eohippus
   Go view his father’s bones.Said they, “You always were as small
   And mean as now we see,And that’s conclusive evidence
   That you’re always going to be.What! Be a great, tall, handsome beast,
   With hoofs to gallop on?Why! You’d have to change your nature!     Said the Loxolophodon.They considered him disposed of,
   And retired with gait serene;That was the way they argued
   In “the early Eocene”.There was once an Anthropoidal Ape,
   Far smarter than the rest,And everything that they could do
   He always did the best;So they naturally disliked him
   And they gave him shoulders cool,And when they had to mention him
   They said he was a fool.Cried this pretentious Ape one day,
   “I’m going to be a man!And stand upright, and hunt, and fight,
   And conquer all I can!I’m going to cut down forest trees,
   To make my houses higher!I’m going to kill the Mastodon!
   I’m going to make a fire!”Loud screamed the Anthropoidal Apes
   With laughter wild and gay;They tried to catch that boastful one,
   But he always got away.So they yelled at him in chorus,
   Which he minded not a whit;And they pelted him with cocoanuts,
   Which didn’t seem to hit.And then they gave him reasons
   Which they thought of much avail,To prove how his preposterous
   Attempt was sure to fail.Said the sages, “In the first place,
   The thing cannot be done!And, second, if it could be,
   It would not be any fun!And, third, and most conclusive,
   And admitting no reply,You would have to change your nature!
   We should like to see you try!”They chuckled then triumphantly,
   These lean and hairy shapes,For these things passed as arguments
   With the Anthropoidal Apes.There was once a Neolithic Man,
   An enterprising wight,Who made his chopping implements
   Unusually bright.Unusually clever he,
   Unusually brave,And he drew delightful Mammoths
   On the borders of his cave.To his Neolithic neighbours,
   Who were startled and surprised,Said he, “My friends, in course of time,
   We shall be civilized!We are going to live in cities!
   We are going to fight in wars!We are going to eat three times a day
   Without the natural cause!We are going to turn life upside down
   About a thing called gold!We are going to want the earth, and take
   As much as we can hold!We are going to wear great piles of stuff
   Outside our proper skins!We are going to have Diseases!
   And Accomplishments!! And Sins!!!”Then they all rose up in fury
   Against their boastful friend,For prehistoric patience
   Cometh quickly to an end.Said one, “This is chimerical!
   Utopian! Absurd!”Said another, “What a stupid life!
   Too dull, upon my word!”Cried all, Before such things can come,
   You idiotic child,You must alter Human Nature!”
   And they all sat back and smiled.Thought they, “An answer to that last
   It will be hard to find!”It was a clinching argument
   To the Neolithic Mind!
~~~
I rode him through the village, smiling.
He tossed his tasseled mane in distress.
The villagers took his gesture as vanity,
and made no attempt to rein him back.
Camped at night by stream and fire,
he seemed to think stories were in order.
The ghoulish tales twisting out his mouth
no longer frightened me. On leaving,
I'd taken on a certain complacency. Later,
he'd characterize my silence as merely
mean. But what is mean about a mouth
that, having no stories, claims it can provide
no flower for the ear, no wine for the wind?
I tried: I told the tale of him, which he
(the version being mine) was not much
interested in. But all of us, the fattening
moon, the yewey trees, the sharp-toothed
stars who combed their glowing backs against
the sky like cats: we laughed. And now
that I had left, where would I take him?
He was vehicle and, as such, responsibility.
He was deadening, tiresome, and necessary.
I made ourselves a home and kept him gently
as a pet. Visitors often wonder aloud,
How do you manage to keep such a creature
inside? The floors are stained with his keep.
I tell them my heart is huge and its doors
are small. Once I took him in he grew. Now
I cannot remove him without killing him,
which, frankly, I have never wanted to do.
~~~
Kills bugs dead. Redundancy is syntactical overkill. A pin-prick of peace at the end of the tunnel of a nightmare night in a roach motel. Their noise infects the dream. In black kitchens they foul the food, walk on our bodies as we sleep over oceans of pirate flags. Skull and crossbones, they crunch like candy. When we die they will eat us, unless we kill them first. Invest in better mousetraps. Take no prisoners on board ship, to rock the boat, to violate our beds with pestilence. We dream the dream of extirpation. Wipe out a species, with God at our side. Annihilate the insects. Sterilize the filthy vermin.
~~~
He dwelt among “apartments let,”       About five stories high; A man I thought that none would get,       And very few would try. A boulder, by a larger stone       Half hidden in the mud, Fair as a man when only one       Is in the neighborhood. He lived unknown, and few could tell       When Jacob was not free; But he has got a wife,—and O!       The difference to me!
~~~
My reading is extremely deep and wide;   And as our modern education goes— Unique I think, and skilfully applied   To Art and Industry and Autres Choses Through many years of scholarly repose.   But there is one thing where I disappoint   My numerous admirers (and my foes).   Painting on Vellum is my weakest point. 
~~~
The most inscrutable beautiful names in this world
always do sound like diseases.
It’s because they are engorged.
G., I am a fool.
What we feel in the solar plexus wrecks us.
Halfway squatting on a crate where feeling happened. Caresses.
You know corporeal gifts besmirch thieves like me.
But she plucks a feather and my steam escapes.
                                                We’re awake
each night at pennymoon and we micro and necro.
I can’t stop. But love and what-all:
the uncomfortable position of telling the truth,
like the lotus, can’t be held long.
                                               If she knew would she
just take all her favors from my marmalade
vessel and chuck them back
into the endless reversible garment which is my life—
                                               an astonishing vanishing.
G., I know this letter is like a slice of elevator accident.
As smart folk would say,
“Everything is only Nothing’s Truck.”
I would revise it and say that everything is only
nothing, truncated.
Love,
Your Igor
~~~
The American public is patient,
 The American public is slow,The American public will stand as much
 As any public I know.We submit to be killed by our railroads,
 We submit to be fooled by our press,We can stand as much government scandal
 As any folks going, I guess,We can bear bad air in the subway,
 We can bear quick death in the street,But we are a little particular
 About the things we eat.It is not so much that it kills us --
 We are used to being killed;But we like to know what fills us
 When we pay for being filledWhen we pay the Beef Trust prices,
 As we must, or go without,It is not that we grudge the money
 But we grudge the horrid doubt.Is it ham or trichinosis?
 Can a label command belief?Is it pork we have purchased, or poison?
 Is it tuberculosis or beef?There is really a choice of diseases,
 To any one, little or big;And no man really pleases
 To die of a long dead pig.We take our risks as we’re able,
 On elevator and train,But to sit in peace at the table
 And to be seized with sudden painWhen we are at home and happy --Is really against the grain.And besides admitting the poison,
 Admitting we all must die,Accepting the second-hand sickness
 From a cholera-smitten stye;Patiently bearing the murder,
 Amiable, meek, inert, —We do rise up and remonstrate
 Against the Packingtown dirt.Let there be death in the dinner,
 Subtle and unforeseen,But O, Mr. Packer, in packing our death,
 Won’t you please to pack it clean!
~~~
Some years ago you heard me sing  My doubts on Alexander Byng.  His sister Sarah now inspires  My jaded Muse, my failing fires.  Of Sarah Byng the tale is told How when the child was twelve years old  She could not read or write a line.  Her sister Jane, though barely nine,  Could spout the Catechism through  And parts of Matthew Arnold too,  While little Bill who came between  Was quite unnaturally keen  On 'Athalie', by Jean Racine.  But not so Sarah! Not so Sal!  She was a most uncultured girl  Who didn't care a pinch of snuff  For any literary stuff And gave the classics all a miss.  Observe the consequence of this!  As she was walking home one day,  Upon the fields across her way  A gate, securely padlocked, stood,  And by its side a piece of wood On which was painted plain and full, BEWARE THE VERY FURIOUS BULL Alas! The young illiterate Went blindly forward to her fate, And ignorantly climbed the gate! Now happily the Bull that day Was rather in the mood for play Than goring people through and through  As Bulls so very often do; He tossed her lightly with his horns  Into a prickly hedge of thorns, And stood by laughing while she strode  And pushed and struggled to the road.  The lesson was not lost upon The child, who since has always gone  A long way round to keep away From signs, whatever they may say,  And leaves a padlocked gate alone.  Moreover she has wisely grown  Confirmed in her instinctive guess  That literature breeds distress. 
~~~
(After Kipling)



When the traveller in the pasture meets the he-bull in his pride, He shouts to scare the monster, who will often turn aside; But the milch cow, thus accosted, pins the traveller to the rail -- For the female of the species is deadlier than the male. When Nag, the raging stallion, meets a careless man on foot, He will sometimes not destroy him, even if the man don’t shoot; But the mare, if he should meet one, makes the bravest cowboy pale -- For the female of the species is more deadly than the male. When our first colonial settlers met the Hurons and Choctaws, They were burned and scalped and slaughtered by the fury-breathing squaws; ‘Twas the women, not the warriors, who in war-paint took the trail -- For the female of the species is more deadly than the male. Man’s timid heart is bursting with the things he must not say As to women, lest in speaking he should give himself away; But when he meets a woman -- see him tremble and turn pale -- For the female of the species is more deadly than the male Lay your money on the hen-fight! On the dog-fight fought by shes! On the gory Ladies Prize-fight -- there are none so fierce as these! See small girls each other pounding, while their peaceful brothers wail -- For the female of the species is more deadly than the male. So in history they tell us how all China shrieked and ran Before the wholesale slaughter dealt by Mrs. Genghis Khan. And Attila, the Scourge of God, who made all Europe quail, Was a female of the species and more deadly than the male. Red war with all its million dead is due to female rage, The names of women murderers monopolize the page, The pranks of a Napoleon are nothing to the tale Of destruction wrought by females, far more deadly than the male. In the baleful female infant this ferocity we spy, It glares in bloodshot fury from the maiden’s dewy eye, But the really deadly female, when you see her at her best, Has two babies at her petticoat and a suckling at her breast. Yet hold! there is Another! A monster even worse! The Terror of Humanity! Creation’s direst curse! Before whom men in thousands must tremble, shrink and fail -- A sanguinary Grandma -- more deadly than the male!
~~~
O little fleas
of speckled light
all dancing
like a satellite
 
O belly green trees
shaded vale
O shiny bobcat
winter trail
 
Amoebic rampage
squamous cock
a Chinese hairpiece
burly sock
 
A grilled banana
smashes gates
and mingeless badgers
venerate
 
The asses of the
winter trees
rock on fat asses
as you please
 
Be jumpy
or unhinged
with joy
enlightened
fry cakes
Staten hoy.
~~~
after Billie



these vitamin double ds
gonna put cows outta business.
these Sunday bests
if frozen would delight.
unpasteurized & untamed
they swing
in the hammock
of my torso.
they magnetize
my man's hands.
like a Wonder Woman blast
or a web of thunder from
Storm's wrist,
this cocktail
is nurturing napalm
manna dew, Pepto Bismol
for civilization.
you can't outwit these
aureolas.
these nipples are
necrophilia's enemy.
Coltrane couldn't blow
these tumescent tubas.
these are gourds
that'll make a shekere
obsolete,
make an eggplant
go pale.
these breasts
gonna put old Betsy
outta business
& send the men
with goats a-packin.
this love is like a faucet,
it turns on & on.
 
~~~
Thou ill-form’d offspring of my feeble brain, Who after birth didst by my side remain, Till snatched from thence by friends, less wise than true, Who thee abroad, expos’d to publick view, Made thee in raggs, halting to th’ press to trudge, Where errors were not lessened (all may judg). At thy return my blushing was not small, My rambling brat (in print) should mother call, I cast thee by as one unfit for light, Thy Visage was so irksome in my sight; Yet being mine own, at length affection would Thy blemishes amend, if so I could: I wash’d thy face, but more defects I saw, And rubbing off a spot, still made a flaw. I stretched thy joynts to make thee even feet, Yet still thou run’st more hobling then is meet; In better dress to trim thee was my mind, But nought save home-spun Cloth, i’ th’ house I find. In this array ’mongst Vulgars mayst thou roam. In Criticks hands, beware thou dost not come; And take thy way where yet thou art not known, If for thy Father askt, say, thou hadst none: And for thy Mother, she alas is poor, Which caus’d her thus to send thee out of door. 
~~~
The last time I saw father alive he was using
a black umbrella, closed, to beat off some pigeons
hanging outside the marble portals of a museum.
We were visitors, walking very slowly, so father
could stoop and examine everything. We had not been
in the museum, but were resting on its steps.
We saw it all—the fountains, the statues, the parks
and the post office. Cities are made of such things.
Once we encountered a wedding coming out of the cathedral
and were caught in a shower of rice; as the bride
flicked her veiled head father licked his little finger
and in this way saved a grain. On the next block
he announced he was going to heaven. But first let’s
go back to the hotel and rest, he said: I want my mint.
Those were practically his last words. And what did I want
more than anything in the world? Probably the ancient Polish
recipe for blood soup, which was finally told to me
in an empty deli in a deserted mill town in western Massachusetts
by the owner’s mother, who was alone one day when I burst
in and demanded a bowl. But, she said, lacing her fingers
around a jar of morello cherries, it requires one cup of
new blood drawn from the goose whose neck you’ve just wrung
to put in the pot, and where in these days can I find
anything as fresh as that? I had lost track of my life
before, but nothing prepared me for the onslaught of
wayfarer’s bliss when she continued to list, one
by one, the impossible ingredients I needed to live.
We sat at the greasy table far into the night, while
snow fell on the locked doors of the church next door,
dedicated to St. Stanislas, which was rumored to be
beautiful inside, and contain the remains of his beloved head.
~~~
As one in dowte, thys ys my ssayyng:Have I dysplesed yow in any thyng?—Thomas Wyatt



That greasy letter into which my legs entered, its tone conspiratorial as his wink, a linguistic wriggling of the eyebrows, a heh heh—it mayas well have appeared before my door chafing the air with the stiff noise of its cheap leather jacket. Am I not chagrined by his propositionto put it all behind us and begin again as friends? How do I reply? And how shall I contend with the fact, Reader, that this matter cannot mean much to you, and that I, as author, am requiredto consider how to tell this tale in a manner that will entertain you, despite having never met you and having no way of knowing how to affect you, get you to let me touch you all over, kiss your lipsthen tongue your mouth open, move my mouth down your neck to the valley of your chest, pluckbuttons off you with my teeth. I have thought of this for a great, long time. I have sat here hunched, feeling sick; I have paced rugs bare. Why should you care? His door opened, selves spilled out myheart's bucket, flopped their silvers across a floor. He was too poor to enter a store, too poor to pay postage for a letter, so poor he'd have stolen crumbs from a mouse, so poor he'd have sold his cadaver if he could. Yet, consider the man: his deep voice began to work away at my inhibitions like sandpaper. Before I knew it, I'd moved right into him, wiped the eyes of windows clear, mended the tears in his screens, made our bed with sheets so icy clean—but you do not want me to give too much away.What fun would that be? Here, as with any tale, the moral's like a molar, set far back in the mouth of the story. Open wider, let me stick my pliers in, wrench it out. Left unattended, anything's prone to spoil, go bad, turn rotten, sink into itself, stink up the whole house. And how shall I begin to make my account? Dig through the junk heap. Start small. He grew over me calmly as a vine climbs a trellis. Your nightgown is unbecoming. A few small terrorisms.Eyes wide at my wince, incredulous. You thought I'dhit you?
~~~
Falling off a triangle.
Putting two fighting fish in one bowl.
Talking yourself into a headcold.
Falling off a rectangle.
Putting insects in ice cubes.
Talking yourself out of doorways.
Falling off a parallelogram.
Talking into a microphone.
Falling off a footstool.
Putting earplugs in acorns.
Looking into a teacup for trouble.
Talking yourself out of breathing.
Taking a nap on a drum set.
Eating a peach with an air filter.
Wearing a dress made of hand grenades.
Talking a mudslide back up a mountain.
Lighting a camp fire in a taxi stand.
Launching a boat on a horse trail.
Hiking in an elevator.
Falling into an envelope.
Discussing smuggling with customs officers.
Taking a cat to a dog show.
Falling in love with a toothache,
Questioning your thumbprint.
Looking for milk in a gas tank.
Kissing hydraulic acid.
Blindfolding a parking meter.
Falling over a water tower.
Reasoning with a baby.
~~~
My heart is bleeding. It bleeds upward and fills
my mouth up with salt. It bleeds because of a city in ruins,
the chair still warm from sister's body,
because it will all be irreproducible. My heart
bleeds because of baby bear not finding mama bear and it bleeds
to the tips of my fingers like I painted my nails Crimson.
Sometimes my heart bleeds so much I am a raisin.
It bleeds until I am a quivering ragged clot, bleeds at the ending
with the heroine and her sunken cancer eyes, at the ending
with the plaintive flute over smoke-choked killing fields. I'm bleeding
a river of blood right now and it's wearing a culvert in me for the blood. My heart
rises up in me, becomes the cork of me and I choke on it. I am bleeding
for you and for me and for the tiny babies and the IED-blown
leg. It bleeds because I'm made that way, all filled up with blood,
my sloppy heart a sponge filled with blood to squeeze onto 
any circumstance. Because it is mine, it will always bleed.
My heart bled today. It bled onto the streets
and the steps of city hall. It bled in the pizza parlor with the useless jukebox.
I've got so much blood to give inside and outside of any milieu.
Even for a bad zoning decision, I'll bleed so much you'll be bleeding,
all of us bleeding in and out like it's breathing,
or kissing, and because it is righteous and terrible and red.
 
~~~
If thy own hand . . . offend thee      —Matthew 18:8



Self-hatred? No, no dear: that seems inflated—chagrin: the shame you feel when friends withdrawfor reasons they leave tactfully unstated,leaving you to guess at your faux pasFrom all you did and didn’t say for ages,as in some vast congressional report,your sin, at last, is lost among the pages;a snow of detail cuts inquiry short.In downtown windows where late sunlight glares,you see yourself, as if you’d never met.Who is this rumpled lookalike who wearsa blouse like yours, the armpits dark with sweat?Your eighth grade diary still makes you cringesaved—for what?—that you might now despisepages time has lent a jaundiced tingepouring forth their daisy-dotted 
~~~
If it takes me all day,
I will get the word freshened out of this poem.
I put it in the first line, then moved it to the second,
and now it won’t come out.
It’s stuck. I’m so frustrated,
so I went out to my little porch all covered in snow
and watched the icicles drip, as I smoked
a cigarette.
Finally I reached up and broke a big, clear spike
off the roof with my bare hand.
And used it to write a word in the snow.
I wrote the word snow.
I can’t stand myself.
~~~
Use a new conductor every time-out
you have sextet—before foreshore,
before pen name gets anywhere
near any bogey opera glass
(to avoid expulsion to any bogey
flunkey that can carry infidel)
Handle conductor gently
Put conductor on as soon as
pen name is hard
be sure rolled-up ringworm is on
the outspokenness. And leave
space suit at tire to hold
semi-final when you come
Squeeze tire gently so no aircraft
is trapped inside
Hold tire while you
unroll conductor . . . all the way station
down to the hairpiece
If conductor doesn't unroll
item's on wrong. Throw item away
Start over with a new onion
~~~
or, The Wary Physician



A doctor, of great skill and fame, Paulo Purganti was his name, Had a good, comely, virtuous wife; No woman led a better life: She to intrigue was ev'n hard hearted: She chuckled when a bawd was carted; And thought the nation ne'er would thrive, Till all the whores were burnt alive.     On married men, that dared be bad, She thought no mercy should be had; They should be hanged, or starved, or flayed, Or served like Romish priests in Swede. In short, all lewdness she defied; And stiff was her parochial pride.     Yet, in an honest way, the dame Was a great lover of that same; And could from Scripture take her cue, That husbands should give wives their due.     Her prudence did so justly steer Between the gay and the severe,That, if in some regards, she choseTo curb poor Paulo in too close;In others, she relaxed again,And governed with a looser rein.    Thus, though she strictly did confineThe doctor from excess of wine;With oysters, eggs, and vermicelli,She let him almost burst his belly:Thus, drying coffee was denied;But chocolate that want supplied;And for tobacco—who could bear it?Filthy concomitant of claret!—(Blest resolution!) one might seeEringo roots, and Bohea tea.She often stroked the doctor's band,And stroked his beard, and kissed his hand,Kindly complained, that after noonHe went to pore on books too soon:She held it wholesomer by much,To rest a little on the couch;About his waist in bed-a-nightsShe clung on close—for fear of sprites.    The doctor understood the call,But had not always wherewithal.    The Lion's skin too short, you know,(As Plutarch's Morals finely show)Was lengthened by the Fox's tail;And Art supplies, where Strength may fail.    Unwilling then in arms to meetThe enemy he could not beat,He strove to lengthen the campaign,And save his forces by chicane.Fabius, the Roman chief, who thusBy fair retreat grew Maximus,Shows us, that all warrior can do,With force superior is cunctando.    One day, then, as the foe drew near,With Love, and Joy, and Life, and Dear,Our Don, who knew this tittle-tattleDid, sure as trumpet, call to battle,Thought it extremely à propos,To ward against the coming blow:To ward: But how? ay, there's the question:Fierce the assault, unarmed the bastion.    The doctor feigned a strange surprise;He felt her pulse; he viewed her eyes;That was too fast; these rolled too quick:She was, he said, or would be sick:He judged it absolutely good,That she should purge, and cleanse her blood.Spa-waters to that end were got:If they passed easily or not,What matters it? the lady's feverContinued as violent as ever.    For a distemper of this kind(Blackmore and Hans are of my mind)If once it youthful blood infects,And chiefly of the female sex,Is scarce removed by pill or potion;Whate'er may be our doctor's notion.    One luckless night then, as in bedThe doctor and the dame were laid,Again this cruel fever came:High pulse, short breath, and blood in flame.What measures shall poor Paulo keep    With Madam in this piteous taking?She, like Macbeth, has murdered sleep,    And won't allow him rest, though waking.Sad state of matters! when we dareNor ask for peace, nor offer war:Nor Livy nor Comines have shown,What in this juncture may be done.Grotius might own, that Paulo's case isHarder, than any which he placesAmongst his Belli, and his Pacis.He strove, alas, but strove in vain,By dint of logic to maintainThat all the sex was born to grieve,Down to her Ladyship from Eve.He ranged his tropes, and preached up patience;Backed his opinion with quotations,Divines and moralists; and run onQuite through from Seneca to Bunyan.As much in vain he bid her tryTo fold her arms, to close her eye;Telling her, rest would do her good,If any thing in Nature could:So held the Greeks quite down from Galen,Masters and princes of the calling:So all our modern friends maintain,(Though no great Greeks) in Warwick-lane.    Reduce, my Muse, the wand'ring song:A tale should never be too long.    The more he talked, the more she burned,And sighed, and tossed, and groaned, and turned:At last, I wish, said she, my dear—(And whispered something in his ear).You wish! wish on, the doctor cries:Lord! when will womankind be wise?What! in your waters; are you mad?Why, poison is not half so bad.I'll do—but I give you warning;You'll die before tomorrow morning.—'Tis kind, my dear, what you advise,The lady with a sign replies:But life, you know, at best is pain:And death is what we should disdain.So do it therefore, and adieu:For I will die for love of you.—Let wanton wives by death be scared:But, to my comfort, I'm prepared.
~~~
The poet pursues his beautiful theme;The preacher his golden beatitude;
  And I run after a vanishing dream—
  The glittering, will-o’-the-wispish gleamOf the properly scholarly attitude—The highly desirable, the very advisable,The hardly acquirable, properly scholarly attitude.
  I envy the savage without any clothes,Who lives in a tropical latitude;
  It’s little of general culture he knows.
  But then he escapes the worrisome woesOf the properly scholarly attitude—The unceasingly sighed over, wept over, cried over,The futilely died over, properly scholarly attitude.
  I work and I work till I nearly am dead,And could say what the watchman said—that I could!
  But still, with a sigh and a shake of the head,
  “You don’t understand,” it is ruthlessly said,“The properly scholarly attitude—The aye to be sought for, wrought for and fought for,The ne’er to be caught for, properly scholarly attitude—”
  I really am sometimes tempted to sayThat it’s merely a glittering platitude;
  That people have just fallen into the way,
  When lacking a subject, to tell of the swayOf the properly scholarly attitude—The easily preachable, spread-eagle speechable,In practice unreachable, properly scholarly attitude.
~~~
SILLIANDER and PATCH. THOU so many favours hast receiv'd,Wondrous to tell, and hard to be believ'd,Oh ! H—— D, to my lays attention lend,Hear how two lovers boastingly contend ;Like thee successful, such their bloomy youth,Renown'd alike for gallantry and truth.St. JAMES's bell had toll'd some wretches in,(As tatter'd riding-hoods alone could sin)The happier sinners now their charms put out,And to their manteaus their complexions suit :The opera queens had finish'd half their faces,And city-dames allready taken places ;Fops of all kinds to see the Lion, run ;The beauties stay till the first act's begun,And beaux step home to put fresh linen on.No well-dress'd youth in coffee-house remain'd,But pensive PATCH, who on the window lean'd ;And SILLIANDER, that alert and gay,First pick'd his teeth, and then began to say.SILLIANDER. Why all these sighs ? ah ! why so pensive grown ?Some cause there is that thus you sit alone.Does hapless passion all this sorrow move ?Or dost thou envy where the ladies love ?PATCH. If, whom they love, my envy must pursue,'Tis sure, at least, I never envy You.SILLIANDER. No, I'm unhappy, You are in the right,'Tis You they favour, and 'tis Me they slight.Yet I could tell, but that I hate to boast,A club of ladies where 'tis Me they toast.PATCH. Toasting does seldom any favour prove ;Like us, they never toast the thing they love.A certain Duke one night my health begun ;With chearful pledges round the room it run,Till the young SILVIA press'd to drink it too,Started, and vow'd she knew not what to do :What, drink a fellow's health ! she dy'd with shame :Yet blush'd whenever she pronounc'd my name.SILLIANDER. Ill fates pursue me, may I never findThe dice propitious, or the ladies kind,If fair Miss FLIPPY's fan I did not tear,And one from me she condescends to wear.PATCH. Women are always ready to receive ;'Tis then a favour when the sex will give.A lady (but she is too great to name)Beauteous in person, spotless is her fame,With gentle strugglings let me force this ring ;Another day may give another thing.SILLIANDER. I cou'd say something — see this billet-doux —And as for presents — look upon my shoe —These buckles were not forc'd, nor half a theft,But a young Countess fondly made the gift.PATCH. My Countess is more nice, more artful too,Affects to fly that I may fierce pursue :This snuff-box which I begg'd, she still deny'd,And when I strove to snatch it, seem'd to hide ;She laugh'd and fled, and as I sought to seize,With affectation cramm'd it down her stays :Yet hop'd she did not place it there unseen,I press'd her breasts, and pull'd it from between.SILLIANDER. Last night, as I stood ogling of her Grace,Drinking delicious poison from her face,The soft enchantress did that face decline,Nor ever rais'd her eyes to meet with mine ;With sudden art some secret did pretend,Lean'd cross two chairs to whisper to a friend,While the stiff whalebone with the motion rose,And thousand beauties to my sight expose.PATCH. Early this morn — (but I was ask'd to come)I drank bohea in CÆLIA's dressing-room :Warm from her bed, to me alone within,Her night-gown fasten'd with a single pin ;Her night-cloaths tumbled with resistless grace,And her bright hair play'd careless round her face ;Reaching the kettle, made her gown unpin,She wore no waistcoat, and her shift was thin.SILLIANDER. See TITIANA driving to the park,Hark ! let us follow, 'tis not yet too dark ;In her all beauties of the spring are seen,Her cheeks are rosy, and her mantle green.PATCH. See, TINTORETTA to the opera goes !Haste, or the crowd will not permit our bows ;In her the glory of the heav'ns we view,Her eyes are star-like, and her mantle blue.SILLIANDER. What colour does in CÆLIA's stockings shine ?Reveal that secret, and the prize is thine.PATCH. What are her garters ! tell me if you can ;I'll freely own thee for the happier man.Thus PATCH continued his heroic strain,While SILLIANDER but contends in vain.After a conquest so important gain'd,Unrival'd PATCH in ev'ry ruelle reign'd.
~~~
The Bison is vain, and (I write it with pain)
   The Door-mat you see on his head
Is not, as some learned professors maintain,   
The opulent growth of a genius’ brain;
   But is sewn on with needle and thread.
~~~
The last line should strike like a lover’s complaint.
You should never see it coming.
And you should never hear the end of it.
~~~
in order to upgrade the community’s appreciation of poetry during the international year of cultural enrichment stage 2, members of the state’s library progress committee decided to establish a small library of t-shirts on which would be printed quality verse in vivid, bold colours and lettering. the poems would be selected on the basis of one of three qualities: is the poem poignant, perspicacious, or pithy.
 
given the respectably researched fact that the wearing of words on t-shirts expresses a deep psychic desire for an intimate union of word and flesh, (and bear in mind the way “logo” nudges towards “logos”) it is not surprising that this library of t-shirts has been a great success. no one seems to mind borrowing pre-worn clothing. of course the library’s washing and ironing staff maintain the t-shirts in excellent condition. even after ten borrowings the shirts look brand new. and considering the phenomenal success of andrew lloyd webber’s “cats” it is no shock revelation that t.s. eliot’s “hollow men” has proved to be the library’s most popular t-shirt so far. in fact there are now eight copies of this shirt on loan, most in metallic or fluoro colours.
 
a couple of the more entrepreneurial of the library’s progress committee members are leading the push for diversification of the library’s poetry program, into neck to knee anti-uv swimwear, with maybe slessor, shelly and stevie smith prints for starters; and into underpants, with their multiple attractions.
 
while the committee feels both these garments could increase poetry’s appeal, they are worried about the practicability of adding these garments to the t-shirt poetry collection. would many members want to borrow preworn underpants, however compelling the poems’ cadences and metaphors; while the wear and tear on the swimming costume fabric via chlorine and salt water would perhaps be too great. however they are interested in marketing and selling these articles from a stall in the library’s foyer. the only committee member unenthusiastic regarding this proposal is an optometrist who has raised the issue of eye damage if the typeface of the lines of verse on the underpants were too small. a solution in the form of large print haikus is being considered.
~~~
The tale which I send, will, I’m sure, hit your fancy,Of Sandy the Captain, and kitchen-maid Nancy;The youth, by friend Colin’s good liquor made gay,Met the damsel, and brimful of frolic and play,He romped with, and kissed her, and tho’ he’d his gun,In vain the poor lassie attempted to run;She pouted and scolded, and liked not the joke,And at least, in the struggle, his finger she broke.Ah! who, my dear brother, would ever believe,That a swain with a look so demure could deceive?We ladies, kind creatures, devoid of suspicion,Were each very ready to play the physician;By Mackay, his sore finger in spirits was laid,And a bag, by my orders, was carefully made.For it neither by one, nor the other was thoughtThat with Nancy, instead of a gate he had fought.But now the poor maiden has told us the truth,As we cannot ourselves have a laugh at the youth;We entreat that from us, you the hero would tell,In his frolicks he ne’er should forget to bribe well;For had but his kisses been seasoned with gold,How he got his lame finger — had never been told.
~~~
The ladies men admire, I’ve heard,
Would shudder at a wicked word.
Their candle gives a single light;
They’d rather stay at home at night.
They do not keep awake till three,
Nor read erotic poetry.
They never sanction the impure,
Nor recognize an overture.
They shrink from powders and from paints ...
So far, I’ve had no complaints.
~~~
The popcorn is greasy, and I forgot to bring a Kleenex.   
A pill that’s a bomb inside the stomach of a man inside
The Embassy blows up. Eructations of flame, luxurious   
cauliflowers giganticize into motion. The entire 29-ft.
screen is orange, is crackling flesh and brick bursting,   
blackening, smithereened. I unwrap a Dentyne and, while
jouncing my teeth in rubber tongue-smarting clove, try   
with the 2-inch-wide paper to blot butter off my fingers.
A bubble-bath, room-sized, in which 14 girls, delectable   
and sexless, twist-topped Creamy Freezes (their blond,
red, brown, pinkish, lavendar or silver wiglets all   
screwed that high, and varnished), scrub-tickle a lone
male, whose chest has just the right amount and distribu-
tion of curly hair. He’s nervously pretending to defend
his modesty. His crotch, below the waterline, is also
below the frame—but unsubmerged all 28 slick foamy boobs.
Their makeup fails to let the girls look naked. Caterpil-
lar lashes, black and thick, lush lips glossed pink like
the gum I pop and chew, contact lenses on the eyes that are   
mostly blue, they’re nose-perfect replicas of each other.
I’ve got most of the grease off and onto this little square   
of paper. I’m folding it now, making creases with my nails.
~~~
﻿﻿Help me come up with a strategy to get through this white noise. 
— U.S. Representative Cynthia McKinney,
  November 2001



Are we on the ground now? Ally cells and I said operations.
We cleared 50% of a wonderful friend and enduring opposition.
Take the solid.
Louder.
We clearly are loud. We are the postal system.
No evidence has been information.
Attacking the caves. Are you on the ground enduring?
A wonderful friend ramped it up.
You ought to open your mail.
Opposition element: the air. The talents work with precision.
84%. The population attacking the caves, the talents work with the
caves and tunnels.
Hiding in caves, wavering in caves and hiding in mosques.
A wonderful friend on the ground.
Freedom I said: the enduring ally cells.
Interested in the view, in our aid sensitivities.
50% to the front of our effort adding that 80% are willing to play.
Independent oper-oppo-sition forces that are rosy.
So make assumptions on the ground. Are we on the ground now?
Can be more than air. The target. The air liaison.
Campaign with the bombing and entirely happy.
Attacking the leaflets.
We keep working hiding in hiding in caves
and cowering in cowering in cowering in caves
and I could say confidential areas.
The mosques and rest efforts are mad.
Execution in the targeting of democracy.
Those risks culti-targeting to minimize the individual.
An obligation to the spirit of enterprise.
A war of roundup freezing worldwide, and proceeding on course.
Training facilities, proceeding on course, freezing their guided
munitions.
A population is tons of struggle against evil.
A civilized world of innocents in the mud, an enemy that’s on the
ground for there is no neutral ever. No neutral homeland.
For the first time first time first time in history
ordinary busi-security bioterror
to defend enemies with the no-ness of life.
Confident in destruction / complete and cause / certain of the rightness
of this time / in the right / man the victories / to comment for a freer
world history / committee of evil / defeat the forces / we will fight and
great coalition wherever they are an era of over flight right against
terror basing global terror the global trade and lives of our world improve /
the modern alliance / I like citizens / but rather than the dust settle it
could mean / as acknowledged / the carpet bombs precision bombs / as
long as 23 months and I said go to America on alert / get a softball to
school if you work / take your child / game this afternoon / game or a
soccer to the president’s going to go to the game / the fight/ our new
baseball game / to help us in our task / force will sign terrorists tracking
American citizens / to protect level warriors / the decibel from these
shadows / open your mail louder
~~~
The threewomen who all walked
In the same dress
And it had falling ferns on it
Skipped parallel
To the progress
Of Giovanni Franchi
Giovanni Franchi’s wrists flicked
Flickeringly as he flacked them
His wrists explained things
Infectiously by way of his adolescence
His adolescence was all there was of him
Whatever was left was rather awkward
His adolescence tuned to the tops of trees
Descended to the fallacious nobility
Of his first pair of trousers
They were tubular      flapped friezily
The color of coppered mustard
What matter
Were they not the first
No others could ever be the first again
The ferns on the flounces of the threewomen
Began fading as she thought of it
Tea table problems for insane asylyms
Are démodé
Démodé
Allow us to rely on our instincts
The threewomen was composed of three instincts
Each sniffing divergently directed draughts
The first instinct    first again    (may
Renascent gods save us from the enigmatic
Penetralia of Firstness)
Was to be faithful to a man       first
The second       to be loyal to herself first
She would have to find which self first
The third which might as well have been first
Was to find out how many toes the
Philosopher Giovanni Bapini had       first
Giovanni Franchi hooligan-faced and latin-born
You imagine what he looked like
Looked as nearly as he could as the
Philosopher looked
His articulations were excellent
Still    where Giovanni Bapini was cymophanous
Giovanni Franchi was merely pale
He scuttled winsomely
To its distribution from a puffer
For the declaration of War
His acolytian sincerity
The sensitive down among his freckles
Fell in with the patriotic souls of flags
Red white and green flags      fillipping piazzas
When the “National Idea” arrived on the Milan Express
Continually cutting off an angle from Paschkowski’s
Through plate-glass swingings
To look as busy bodily
As the philosopher’s brain was
As Giovanni Bapini importuned mobs
From monumental gums
To the sparky detritus
From the hurried cigarette
Of his disciple
Whose papa and mama kept a trattoria
Audaciously squatting right opposite the Pitti Palace
The Pitti Palace however stolid      could hardly help noticing
Being an aristocrat it went on looking
As plainly piled up as ever
The Pitti Palace has never been known to mention the trattoria
Or mention Giovanni Franchi
Sitting in it
At a book
It could not see from that distance
Giovanni watching the munchers supporting his parents
With an eye
On assuring himself
Of their sufficient impression
By erudition
He was so young
That explains so much
No book ever explained what to be young is
But they look so much more important for that
Giovanni was in continuous ecstacy
Induced by the imposing look of them
When Giovanni Bapini spoke of them
He could not tell
How completely more precious
Would be such knowledge
As how many toes the philosopher Giovanni Bapini had
Now the threewomen
For pity’s sake
Let us think of her as she    to save time
Seeing the minor Giovanni
Sitting at the major Giovanni’s feet
Made sure he must be counting his toes
All to the contrary    he was picking the philosopher’s brains
Happy in the security that when he had done
He would still be youthful enough to sort out his own
He listened at the elder’s lips
That taught him of earthquakes and
Of women—
His manners were abominable
He would kill a woman
Quite inconspicuously it is true
And neglect to attend her funeral
I mean the older man
And what he told
Giovanni Franchi
About these pernicious persons
Was so extremely good for him
It entirely spoilt his first love-affair
To such an extent          it never came off
We have read of
Trattoria    meaning eating house.
Piazzas    or squares
The Pitti Palace    enormous
And Paschkowski’s      for beer
All are in Firenze
Firenze is Florence
Some think it is a woman with flowers in her hair
But NO       it is a city with stones on the streets
Giovanni Bapini often said
Everybody in Firenze knows me
And everybody did
Excepting—That is      she didn’t
She never knew what he was
Or how he was himself
Yet she uniquely was the one
To speculate      upon the number of his toes
The days growing longer
Fulfilling her of curiousity
She made a moth’s net
Of metaphor and miracles
And on the incandescent breath of civilizations
She chased by moon-and-morn light
Philosopher’s toes
As virginal      as had he never worn them
Clear of ‘white marks means money’
All quicks and cores
They fluttered to her fantasy
Fell into her lap
While she gathered her ferny flounces about them
They inappropriately passed
But Giovanni Franchi was there
He almost winked it at her
That he was there
His eyes were intrepid with phantom secrets
The Philosopher had flung to him
And as she tripped by him
She guessed      these all
All    but the number of those toes
She made diurnal pilgrimage
To the trattoria
To eat
Trout    that might have been trained for circuses
If minarets    grew in miniature whirlpools
And mayonnaise       that helped her to forget
That what is underneath       need never matter
She put all minor riddles out of her
Such as
What was the under-cover of Franchi’s book
Telling to the plaid pattern of the tablecloth
Too shy to interrogate
She sent ambassadors
To the disciple
They returned
Oh rats
Quite manifest    that Giovanni Franchi
Some semieffigy
Damned by scholiums
Knew no more      how many toes—
Than      Giovanni Bapini knew himself
 
~~~
is doing her usual for comic relief.
                        She doesn’t
               see why she should get on the boat, etc.,
etc., while life as we know it hangs by a thread.
                        Even God
               has had one or two great deadpan lines:Who told you (this was back at the start—
                        the teeth
               of the tautology had just snapped shut) Whotold you you were naked? The world
                        was so new
               that death hadn’t been till this minute
required. What makes you think (the
                        ground
               withers under their feet) we were told? 
The woman’s disobedience is good for
                        plot,
               as also for restoring plot to human
scale: three hundred cubits by fifty
                        by what?
               What’s that in inches exactly? Whereas
all obstinate wife is common coin.
                        In
               the beginning was nothing and then a flaw
in the nothing, a sort of mistake that amplified, the
                        nothing
               mistranscribed (it takes such discipline
to keep the prospect clean) and now the lion
                        whelps,
               the beetle rolls its ball of dung, and Noah
with no more than a primitive double-
                        entry audit
               is supposed to make it right.
We find the Creator in an awkward bind.
                        Washed back
               to oblivion? Think again. The housewife
at her laundry tub has got a better grip.   
                        Which may
               be why we’ve tried to find her laughable,
she’s such an unhappy reminder of what
                        understanding
               costs. Ask the boy who cannot, though
God know’s he’s tried, he swears
                        each bar
               of melting soap will be his last, who cannot
turn the water off when once he’s turned it on.
                        His hands
               are raw. His body seems like filth to him.Who told you (the pharmacopoeia has
                        changed,
               the malady’s still the same) Who told youyou were food for worms?
                        What
               makes you think (the furrow, the fruit)I had to be told?
~~~
It’s a wave, isn’t it? Not a particle.

A fresh, cool wave, so why am I flushed

and not washed? Why dirtier than before?

 

 

1. Etymology

 

On the subject of our names.

They’re so embracing,

thinking they’re all us

 

and swallowing themselves

into our nausea.

 

Yet we never quite die on the spot.

We put off being what we’re called,

we take the hint.

 

Time is never wasted.

It is always spent.

 

 

2. Teleology

 

Sheer fabric trailing through 4 a.m.

I thought it was opaque and earlier.

 

 

3. Mathematics

 

I know you know I know.

And the mirror multiplies inside.

 

The world is no bigger, but next time

do the math,

 

because I wanted to know none

of what I now know twice.

 

 

4. The Principle of the Borg

 

Saying “There’s no one like me”

accomplishes the exact opposite

of what you mean.

 

It is true only insofar as it is true

for everyone equally.

 

So it means you are not special

in any way. Which should be enough for you.

 

 

5. Documentary

 

This clothing, a maladaptive wrapping,

cuts me up. I am a vignette,

 

floated knowingly

since I pulled myself through myself,

 

like a unitard. Too many eyeholes

 

have been cut and pieced together

to make flesh less various with others.

 

 

6. Medicine

 

The cure for embarrassment

is substitution.

 

Strap, don’t pluck.

Baldness makes headlines.

 

Use grass. Use less.

Shorts under your skirt for recess.

 

Redo the surfaces of your wrong turns to make

taking them smoother in the future.

 

 

7. Cosmology

 

Things are less embarrassing

at the cellular level. Remember?

 

We were a whole part of the universe

before Mother busted the party.

 

Before we were ourselves.

Now, like dirty soap, we

 

attract what we repel.

 

 

8. Apology

 

Even the clumsiest fate is perfectly shaped,

so the view took over looking

 

but the sweetest thing I’ve ever known

is obscene with a beautiful

 

sugar rotted down to its truth.

 

Loving you a serious accidental shame

and day flatulates into night,

 

trips and falls in front of millions

into morning.

 

In thrall to this pocus:

the end of fear starts

 

with such an annihilating blush,

with such a stutter.
~~~
Harry Whittington: the man accidentally shot by Dick Cheney



Have you ever been in a situation
where somebody you thought was your friend
did something that hurt you very much,
and then they tried to blame it on you,
and then you had a heart attack?
Just wondering.
I thought Jack Abramoff was my buddy—
a small fish with a large chicken.
What a dick.
Why’d he have to remind me of my first wife,
Jacqueline Bouvier-Kennedy-Onassis-Bono-Crowe-Pitt-Degeneres-Federline?
Of course, that speaks volumes to and of itself.
On the other hand, everything tastes like chicken.
And cooked people taste like butter.
I barely touched the clam chowder
but I ate the chicken fried steak.
Then I ate hot beignet and sludgy chicory
and I accidentally drove the hot ‘n’ sporty.
Now I may try the chicken fries.
Why poo’ed vindaloo?
The founding fathers risked life and limb
just so I could trust the kung pao ham.
But the former potions master
spiked my polyjuice with mango juice,
and now I like drinks with chicks in them.
Doesn’t anyone care about my feelings?
All I wanted to do was kill little birds.
Because, you know, that’s fun.
I forget, which one am I banging,
that Plame bitch or the Ambassador to Switzerland?
I’d ask Dick which of the two he’s screwing
but he never answers my emails.
In other news, I’ve been up to my neck in new food intern activity.
The skewers are kind of like hot wings,
except they are made with chicken tenders.
The backwash is kinda long,
but watch the whole thing for the slo-mo matrix-esque finale.
Way cooler than any other stick figure theater.
A barn-raised quail just said
“Bugs Bunny isn’t real.”
Is there no end to the horrors
this shooting will reveal?
~~~
if your complexion is a mess
our elixir spells skin success
you’ll have appeal bewitch be adored
hechizando con crema dermoblanqueadora
what we sell is enlightenment
nothing less than beauty itself
since when can be seen in the dark
what shines hidden in dirt
double dutch darky
take kisses back to Africa
they dipped you in a vat
at the wacky chocolate factory
color we’ve got in spades
melanin gives perpetual shade
though rhythm’s no answer to cancer
pancakes pale and butter can get rancid
~~~
And now I have another lad!
    No longer need you tell
How all my nights are slow and sad
    For loving you too well.
His ways are not your wicked ways,
    He's not the like of you.
He treads his path of reckoned days,
    A sober man, and true.
They'll never see him in the town,
    Another on his knee.
He'd cut his laden orchards down,
   If that would pleasure me.
He'd give his blood to paint my lips
    If I should wish them red.
He prays to touch my finger-tips
   Or stroke my prideful head.
He never weaves a glinting lie,
    Or brags the hearts he'll keep.
I have forgotten how to sigh—
    Remembered how to sleep.
He's none to kiss away my mind—
    A slower way is his.
Oh, Lord! On reading this, I find
    A silly lot he is.
 
~~~
The Swiss just do whateverlike masturbating their doink-doinksdeep in rural Francein the shadow of Mont Blanc.Heavy, dependableand prepared for whateverthe Swiss vago-simulacrum recognizesas larderKing Hussein and President Fabio,always just about to touch each otheron their devolved sparkle-offsand Neil Patrick Harris appreciation pages.Everyone knows when these bizzarre Swiss comeththey cometh with fluffy Beatles-likesix packs of shit-covered reindeerknock-knocking like a bummer.Glitter is the Swiss Army knifeof the most bedazzlingly ridiculousemotions: the part just beforethe paranoid cheese-maker says,“Whatever you do in Palm Springs,don’t yodel”—a most unusual Swiss Missmixture of very early skunk and the roboticsadness of women’s moldheavy, greasy, dense and low, likelethargic sea-green gardenswith a buzz overpowering, likemodern outdoor inbreeding.
~~~
All day they stream past, petitioners
for understanding, accolade, critique.
I read them all, a vast anthology
of jumbled genres on a common theme:
affliction. So I parse, interpret, scan.
I graph dysrhythmias, dysmetrias;
I eavesdrop on caesuras for unsaid
murmurs, gallops, rubs, snaps, flutters, clicks.
The perils of misreading harrow me—
beware the treacheries of metaphor!—
the elephant that squats upon a chest
is not a burning heart or waterbrash.
Just take the imagists. Their heads explode.
St Elmo's fire flashdances on their limbs.
They float, they swim. Knives twist within their flesh.
They're ball-and-chained by lead, filled with concrete.
Butterflies inhabit them. Their pipes
are wrong, and clogged. Their systems freeze and crash.
Invaded, they resist; defenses fail.
What they need, they think, is you to flush
it out of them, whatever it is, doc.
The formalists present minutiae,
in alphabetical enjambed iambs—
pentameter's ten digits, five lub-dubs—
from acne, backpain, catarrh, dandruff, eye-
strain, flatfoot, gas pains, hangnail, itchiness,
the jitters, kinks, lethargies, migraines, nose-
bleeds, obstipation, panics, queasy retch-
ings, styes and tremors, ulcers, vertigo,
to wandering womb, xerosis, yaws and zits.
Free versers, on the other hand, wax Walt
Whitmanic: their barbaric yawps celebrate and sing
incantatory songs of themselves, songs
of the breath as it wheezes and rales through them,
the short breath and long breath, the breath that is moist or dry,
songs of the blood, the thick- and thinness of it, its heat, its turbulence,
songs of the gut, its rippling coils, the dark burden of its secret indulgences,
songs of the muscled limb, inflamed with toil or the languid thrash of love.
Didacticists, of course, will always add
their theories of omission or commission:
slept in a draft, got their feet wet, caught a chill,
forgot their overshoes and oversoul,
ate too little roughage, too much ham,
should have pumped less iron or pumped more,Mea culpa, meus morbus they intone,
certain you'll absolve them back to health.
Narrativists enshrine a fleeting pain
within an epic of chronologyI woke at six—I'm a morning person—brushed my teeth, ate oatmeal with a patof low-fat margarine, the kind that hasthe dancing turkey on the tub, on salefor .99 at Johnnie's, by the time
you tune back in it's afternoon, the pain
has come and gone; they're vacuuming the rug,
the doorbell rings, the kettle's whistling,
you try to interrupt—where did you saythat pain was?—loquacity steamrolls on
through supper, TV, bedtime, dreams, alarm
clock going off at six. Try Tylenol,
you say, your fingers crossed. Call if it's worse.
Then there's the avant garde. The cutting edge.
The text Munchausens off the sizzling page.
Hypoglossalalia muscles in,
between John Cagey silences, the din
and Sturm of wild unsound, unsense.
O, there are stranger dysphasias, Wernicke,
than are dreamt of in your neurologies,
mutant L=A=N=G=U=A=G=Es that cacophone
far off the beaten geographic tongue,
where elephants explode and overshoes
fibrillate with longing—El Dorado,
Shangri-la, Eden, Heaven, Hell—you name it,
it's yours. And that's, of course, the joke. You nod.
You say, "I understand." You really don't.
~~~
The poem in which we drive an hour to the beach and Uncle Dave doesn't get out
         of his lawn chair once.
The poem in which we left the yellow plastic shovel behind and everyone is bereft.
The poem in which I can't stop talking about how you walked deep into Lake Erie
         and the water was still only up to your knees when you turned into a speck
         past the rock jetty.
The poem in which everyone listens to celebrity gossip in the car on the way back.
The poem in which I pontificate on how ugly the fiancée of that Jonas brother is,
         and how they're too young to get married, and how my grandmother's old
         neighbor would have said, "Ugly? She can't help that she's ugly. It's that she's
         so stupid," and I would have yelled at her for assuming that all former hair-
         dressers are dim.
The poem in which I turn into my grandmother's old neighbor.
The poem in which I remember very clearly how they both stored tissues in their
          bras.
The poem in which I think about how this would horrify your mother—the
          pendulous breasts, the moist tissues, the dipping into the cleavage to retrieve
          anything.
The poem in which your mother tries not to wince when I order whatever I want
          from the menu despite her coupon for two medium 1-topping pizzas.
The poem in which I try to find a deeper meaning for why I notice the woman
          ahead of us in line at Johnny's Liquor Store who buys a pack of menthols and        
          asks the guy behind the counter if he knows her good-for-nothing brother. She
          has hair that looks like cats got at a skein of yarn, and a tattoo above her ankle
          that's dark and unspecified. It's far enough above her ankle that it's nearly mid-
          calf—like her ankle and calf are two different countries and the tattoo got lost
          in the borderlands on the way to its actual destination.
The poem in which I am territory that is under dispute and no one will occupy it
          because of fear and uncertainty.
The poem in which I reach the conclusion that this feeling is inspired by your
          mother and the way she hums out-of-season carols while doing kitchen tasks,
          though it's not really about the humming but rather the time she asked me to
          light the Hanukkah candles in the attic because it would be better if they were
          out of the way for the Christmas party.
The poem in which you and I are in line waiting to buy a mixed six-pack of Great
          Lakes and I am staring at a stranger's tattoo and thinking about the fact that I
          am not Anne Frank while the baby is in the car with your mother.
The poem in which I go into Walmart and buy the baby an olive-green cap that
          looks suspiciously like Fidel Castro's.
The poem in which I could eradicate the fact that I ever went into Walmart and
          bought anything so the baby can one day start a revolution.
The poem in which we see a couple on the highway median in a stalled-out Buick
          and don't stop to help.
The poem in which the highway median looks like the spit of land between two
          enemy trenches and I feel a deep longing for my childhood.
The poem in which I remember, for no apparent reason, the tornado instructions
          taped to the sides of all the filing cabinets in one office I worked in that was on
          the top floor of a mostly abandoned mall in Overland Park, Kansas. All that
          was left: decorative fountains, floor tiles, mirrored ceilings, Nearly Famous
          Pizza, the carcass of Sears.
The poem in which we leave Northeastern Ohio, The poem in which we return to
          Northeastern Ohio.
The poem in which it is night and we are lost in Northeastern Ohio and we keep
          passing Amish buggies adorned with reflective tape.
The poem in which the moon is a vehicle for content, and is far less than a perfect
          reflector of anything.
The poem in which we are all in some kind of limbo.
 
~~~
Godolphin Horne was Nobly Born;   
He held the Human Race in Scorn,   
And lived with all his Sisters where   
His Father lived, in Berkeley Square.   
And oh! the Lad was Deathly Proud!   
He never shook your Hand or Bowed,   
But merely smirked and nodded thus:   
How perfectly ridiculous!
Alas! That such Affected Tricks   
Should flourish in a Child of Six!
(For such was Young Godolphin's age).   
Just then, the Court required a Page,   
Whereat the Lord High Chamberlain   
(The Kindest and the Best of Men),   
He went good-naturedly and took   
A Perfectly Enormous Book
Called People Qualified to Be
Attendant on His Majesty,
~~~
Strephon, your breach of faith and trust      Affords me no surprise; A man who grateful was, or just,      Might make my wonder rise. That heart to you so fondly tied,      With pleasure wore its chain, But from your cold neglectful pride,      Found liberty again. For this no wrath inflames my mind,      My thanks are due to thee; Such thanks as gen'rous victors find,     Who set their captives free.
~~~
I want to spend a lot but not all of my years with you.
We’ll talk about kids
                              but make plans to travel.
I will remember your eyes
                              as green when they were gray.
Our dogs will be named For Now and Mostly.
               Sex will be good but next door’s will sound better.
There will be small things.
I will pick up your damp towel from the bed,
                                                            and then I won’t.
I won’t be as hot as I was
                              when I wasn’t yours
and your hairline now so
               untrustworthy.
When we pull up alongside a cattle car
                              and hear the frightened lows,
                              I will silently judge you
                              for not immediately renouncing meat.
You will bring me wine
                              and notice how much I drink.
                                              The garden you plant and I plant
                              is tunneled through by voles,
                                                             the vowels
                                                             we speak aren’t vows,
               but there’s something
                              holding me here, for now,
               like your eyes, which I suppose
                                                             are brown, after all.
~~~
Razors pain you;
Rivers are damp;
Acids stain you;
And drugs cause cramp.
Guns aren’t lawful;
Nooses give;
Gas smells awful;
You might as well live.
~~~
Alas, my Purse! how lean and low!My silken Purse! what art thou now!One I beheld—but stocks will fall—When both thy ends had wherewithal.When I within thy slender fenceMy fortune placed, and confidence;A poet’s fortune!—not immense:Yet, mixed with keys, and coins among,Chinked to the melody of song.
  Canst thou forget, when, high in air,I saw thee fluttering at a fair?And took thee, destined to be sold,My lawful Purse, to have and hold?Yet used so oft to disembogue,No prudence could thy fate prorogue.Like wax thy silver melted down,Touch but the brass, and lo! ’twas gone:And gold would never with thee stay,For gold had wings, and flew away.
  Alas, my Purse! yet still be proud,For see the Virtues round thee crowd!See, in the room of paltry wealth,Calm Temperance rise, the nurse of health;And Self-Denial, slim and spare,And Fortitude, with look severe;And Abstinence, to leanness prone,And Patience, worn to skin and bone:Prudence and Foresight on thee wait,And Poverty lies here in state!Hopeless her spirits to recruit,For every Virtue is a mute.
  Well then, my Purse, thy Sabbaths keep;Now thou art empty, I shall sleep.No silver sounds shall thee molest,Nor golden dreams disturb my breast.Safe shall I walk with thee along,Amidst temptations thick and strong;Catched by the eye, no more shall stopAt Wildey’s toys, or Pinchbeck’s shop;Nor cheapening Payne’s ungodly books,Be drawn aside by pastry-cooks:But fearless now we both may goWhere Ludgate’s mercers bow so low;Beholding all with equal eye,Nor moved at—“Madam, what d’ye buy?”
  Away, far hence each worldly care!Nor dun nor pick-purse shalt thou fear,Nor flatterer base annoy my ear.Snug shalt thou travel through the mob,For who a poet’s purse will rob?And softly sweet in garret highWill I thy virtues magnify;Outsoaring flatterers’ stinking breath,And gently rhyming rats to death. 
~~~
at Las Villas, a small Carol City bar with a makeshift stage,
where he spends too much time drinking,
pretending he can learn to play the guitar at forty-five,
become a singer, a musician,
who writes about "Que Difícil Es...."
to live in Spanish in Miami,
a city yet to be translated,
in a restaurant where he has taken us for Cuban food,
where I sit, frozen, unable to make a sound,
where Mother smiles,
all her teeth exposed,
squeezes my hand,
where Mae and Mitzy hide
under the table shielding them from shame
with a blood-red tablecloth,
leaving my mother and me,
pale-faced, trapped by the spotlight shining in our eyes,
making it difficult for us to pretend
we do not know the man in the white suit
pointing to us.
 
~~~
My dear, you are the high-speed car chase, and I,   
I am the sheet of glass being carefully carried   
across the street by two employees of Acme Moving   
who have not parked on the right side   
because the plot demands that they make   
the perilous journey across traffic,   
and so they are cursing as rehearsed   
as they angle me into the street, acting as if   
they intend to get me to the department store, as if   
I will ever take my place as the display window, ever clear   
the way for a special exhibit at Christmas, or be Windexed   
once a day, or even late at night, be pressed against   
by a couple who can’t make it back to his place,   
and so they angle me into the street, a bright lure,   
a provocative claim, their teaser, and indeed   
you can’t resist my arguments, fatally flawed   
though they are, so you come careening to but and butt   
and rebut, you come careening, you being   
both cars, both chaser and chased, both good and bad, both   
done up with bullets that haven’t yet done you in.   
I know I’m done for: there’s only one street   
on this set and you’ve got a stubborn streak a mile long.   
I can smell the smoke already.   
                                                No matter, I’d rather shatter   
than be looked through all day. So come careening; I know   
you’ve other clichés to hammer home: women with groceries   
to send spilling, canals to leap as the bridge is rising.   
And me? I’m so through. I’ve got a thousand places to be.
~~~
Forgive me, if I wound your ear,
     By calling of you Nancy,Which is the name of my sweet friend,
     The other’s but her fancy.Ah, dearest girl! how could your mind
     The strange distinction frame?The whimsical, unjust caprice,
     Which robs you of your name.Nancy agrees with what we see
     A being wild and airy;Gay as a nymph of Flora’s train,
     Fantastic as a fairy.But Anna’s of a different kind,
     A melancholy maid,Boasting a sentimental soul,
     In solemn pomp arrayed.Oh ne’er will I forsake the sound,
     So artless and so freeBe what you will with all mankind,
     But Nancy still with me.
~~~
Oh, dear! The Christian virtues will disappear! Nowhere on land or sea Will be room for charity! Nowhere, in field or city, A person to help or pity! Better for them, no doubt, Not to need helping out Of their old miry ditch. But, alas for us, the rich! For we shall lose, you see, Our boasted charity!—  Lose all the pride and joy Of giving the poor employ, And money, and food, and love (And making stock thereof!). Our Christian virtues are gone, With nothing to practise on! It don’t hurt them a bit, For they can’t practise it; But it’s our great joy and pride—  What virtue have we beside? We believe, as sure as we live, That it is more blessed to give Than to want, and waste, and grieve, And occasionally receive! And here are the people pressing  To rob us of our pet blessing! No chance to endow or bedizen A hospital, school or prison, And leave our own proud name To Gratitude and Fame! No chance to do one good deed, To give what we do not need, To leave what we cannot use To those whom we deign to choose! When none want broken meat, How shall our cake be sweet? When none want flannels and coals, How shall we save our souls? Oh, dear! Oh, dear! The Christian virtues will disappear! The poor have their virtues rude,— Meekness and gratitude, Endurance, and respect For us, the world’s elect; Economy, self-denial, Patience in every trial, Self-sacrifice, self-restraint,— Virtues enough for a saint! Virtues enough to bear All this life’s sorrow and care! Virtues by which to rise To a front seat in the skies! How can they turn from this  To common earthly bliss,— Mere clothes, and food, and drink, And leisure to read and think, And art, and beauty, and ease,— There is no crown for these! True, if their gratitude  Were not for fire and food, They might still learn to bless The Lord for their happiness! And, instead of respect for wealth, Might learn from beauty, and health, And freedom in power and pelf, Each man to respect himself! And, instead of scraping and saving, Might learn from using and having That man’s life should be spent In a grand development! But this is petty and small; These are not virtues at all; They do not look as they should; They don’t do us any good! Oh, dear! Oh, dear! Oh, dear! The Christian virtues will disappear!
~~~
Adjectives continue their downward spiral, with adverbs likely to follow. Wisdom, grace, and beauty can be had three for a dollar, as they head for a recession. Diaphanous, filigree, pearlescent, and love are now available at wholesale prices. Verbs are still blue-chip investments, but not many are willing to sell. The image market is still strong, but only for those rated AA or higher. Beware of cheap imitations sold by the side of the road. Only the most conservative consider rhyme a good option, but its success in certain circles warrants a brief mention. The ongoing search for fresh metaphor has caused concern among environmental activists, who warn that both the moon and the sea have measurably diminished since the dawn of the Romantic era. Latter-day prosodists are having to settle for menial positions in poultry plants, where an aptitude for repetitive rhythms is considered a valuable trait. The outlook for the future remains uncertain, and troubled times may lie ahead. Supply will continue to outpace demand, and the best of the lot will remain unread.
~~~
She brightens at the evidence. Like a strong appliance.
 
You can make it hot.
 
Grown ass people having tantrums.
 
I’m unbought, unheated. Like a perfectly square morsel of lasagna.
 
A wrathful rubics cube.
 
To realize, I wish to ridicule people interested in martial arts.
 
That I’m not getting better.
 
 
 
My uncle would prank call my father, “Immigration!”
 
He’d crow. And my father would fall to silence.
 
No matter the heavy accent.
 
No matter the voice he’d known unto boredom.
 
One wing swigging out to its brother on the other bird.
 
I measured this silence when I was a girl.
 
The quality of the joke and how it rested
 
on the bad stomach of a tensile citizenry.
 
The joke was that, in an instant,
 We Lost Everything.
 
 
 
It is important to remember who would laugh first—
 
the perpetrator/uncle/jokester or the assailed/father/feather.
 
Or maybe, it isn’t.
 
Maybe what you should know is that
 
they told this joke over and over and ever.
 
My uncle crowed. My father disbelieved. We lost everything.
 
And then, the svelte, sweet brier laughter.
 
~~~
In speaking of ‘aspiration,’
 From the recesses of a pen more dolorous than blackness      
    itself,
   Were you presenting us with one more form of imperturbable 
      French drollery,
   Or was it self directed banter?
     Habitual ennui
       Took from you, your invisible, hot helmet of anaemia—
   While you were filling your “little glass” from the 
         decanter
       Of a transparent-murky, would-be-truthful “hobohemia”—
     And then facetiously
   Went off with it?  Your soul’s supplanter,
 The spirit of good narrative, flatters you, convinced that 
       in reporting briefly
One choice incident, you have known beauty other than that    
      of stys, on Which to fix your admiration.So far as the future is concerned,
“Shall not one say, with the Russian philosopher,
  ‘How is one to know what one doesn’t know?’”
          So far as the present is concerned,
~~~
It was an Artless Poster Girl pinned up against my wall, She was tremendous ugly, she was exceeding tall; I was gazing at her idly, and I think I must have slept, For that poster maiden lifted up her poster voice, and wept. She said between her poster sobs, ‘I think it’s rather rough To be jeered and fleered and flouted, and I’ve stood it long enough; I’m tired of being quoted as a Fright and Fad and Freak, And I take this opportunity my poster mind to speak. ‘Although my hair is carmine and my nose is edged with blue, Although my style is splashy and my shade effects are few, Although I’m out of drawing and my back hair is a show, Yet I have n’t half the whimseys of the maidens that you know. ‘I never keep you waiting while I prink before the glass, I never talk such twaddle as that little Dawson lass, I never paint on china, nor erotic novels write, And I never have recited “Curfew must not ring tonight”. ‘I don’t rave over Ibsen, I never, never flirt, I never wear a shirt waist with a disconnected skirt; I never speak in public on “The Suffrage”, or “The Race”, I never talk while playing whist, or trump my partner’s ace.’ I said: ‘O artless Poster Girl, you’re in the right of it, You are a joy forever, though a thing of beauty, nit!’ And from her madder eyebrows to her utmost purple swirl, Against all captious critics I’ll defend the Poster Girl.
~~~
O what a strange parcel of creatures are we, Scarce ever to quarrel, or even agree; We all are alone, though at home altogether, Except to the fire constrained by the weather; Then one says, ‘’Tis cold’, which we all of us know, And with unanimity answer, ‘’Tis so’: With shrugs and with shivers all look at the fire, And shuffle ourselves and our chairs a bit nigher; Then quickly, preceded by silence profound, A yawn epidemical catches around: Like social companions we never fall out, Nor ever care what one another’s about; To comfort each other is never our plan, For to please ourselves, truly, is more than we can.
~~~
California night. The Devil’s wind,   
the Santa Ana, blows in from the east,   
raging through the canyon like a drunk   
screaming in a bar.
                            The air tastes like
a stubbed-out cigarette. But why complain?   
The weather’s fine as long as you don’t breathe.   
Just lean back on the sweat-stained furniture,   
lights turned out, windows shut against the storm,   
and count your blessings.
                                     Another sleepless night,
when every wrinkle in the bedsheet scratches   
like a dry razor on a sunburned cheek,   
when even ten-year whiskey tastes like sand,   
and quiet women in the kitchen run   
their fingers on the edges of a knife
and eye their husbands’ necks. I wish them luck.
Tonight it seems that if I took the coins
out of my pocket and tossed them in the air   
they’d stay a moment glistening like a net   
slowly falling through dark water.
                                                   I remember
the headlights of the cars parked on the beach,   
the narrow beams dissolving on the dark   
surface of the lake, voices arguing
about the forms, the crackling radio,   
the sheeted body lying on the sand,
the trawling net still damp beside it. No,
she wasn’t beautiful—but at that age
when youth itself becomes a kind of beauty—
“Taking good care of your clients, Marlowe?”
Relentlessly the wind blows on. Next door   
catching a scent, the dogs begin to howl.   
Lean, furious, raw-eyed from the storm,   
packs of coyotes come down from the hills   
where there is nothing left to hunt.
~~~
You love a woman and you wonder where she goes all night in some tricked-
out taxicab, with her high heels and her corset and her big, fat mouth.
You love how she only wears her glasses with you, how thick
and cow-eyed she swears it’s only ever you she wants to see.
You love her, you want her very ugly. If she is lovely big, you want her
scrawny. If she is perfect lithe, you want her ballooned, a cosmonaut.
How not to love her, her bouillabaisse, her orangina. When you took her
to the doctor the doctor said, “Wow, look at that!” and you were proud,
you asshole, you love and that’s how you are in love. Any expert, observing
human bodies, can see how she’s exceptional, how she ruins us all.
But you really love this woman, how come no one can see this? Everyone must
become suddenly very clumsy at recognizing beauty if you are to keep her.
You don’t want to lose anything, at all, ever. You want her sex depilated, you
want everyone else not blind, but perhaps paralyzed, from the eyes down.
You wonder where she goes all night. If she leaves you, you will know
everything about love. If she’s leaving you now, you already know it.
~~~
Lying is an occupation,
     Used by all who mean to rise;
Politicians owe their station,
     But to well concerted lies.
These to lovers give assistance,
     To ensnare the fair-one's heart;
And the virgin's best resistance
     Yields to this commanding art.
Study this superior science,
     Would you rise in Church or State;
Bid to Truth a bold defiance,
     'Tis the practice of the great.
~~~
I don’t like what the moon is supposed to do.
Confuse me, ovulate me,
spoon-feed me longing. A kind of ancient
date-rape drug. So I’ll howl at you, moon,
I’m angry. I’ll take back the night. Using me to
swoon at your questionable light,
you had me chasing you,
the world’s worst lover, over and over
hoping for a mirror, a whisper, insight.
But you disappear for nights on end
with all my erotic mysteries
and my entire unconscious mind.
How long do I try to get water from a stone?
It’s like having a bad boyfriend in a good band.
Better off alone. I’m going to write hard
and fast into you, moon, face-fucking.
Something you wouldn’t understand.
You with no swampy sexual
promise but what we glue onto you.
That’s not real. You have no begging
cunt. No panties ripped off and the crotch
sucked. No lacerating spasms
sending electrical sparks through the toes.
Stars have those.
What do you have? You’re a tool, moon.
Now, noon. There’s a hero.
The obvious sun, no bullshit, the enemy
of poets and lovers, sleepers and creatures.
But my lovers have never been able to read
my mind. I’ve had to learn to be direct.
It’s hard to learn that, hard to do.
The sun is worth ten of you.
You don’t hold a candle
to that complexity, that solid craze.
Like an animal carcass on the road at night,
picked at by crows,
taunting walkers and drivers. Your face
regularly sliced up by the moving
frames of car windows. Your light is drawn,
quartered, your dreams are stolen.
You change shape and turn away,
letting night solve all night’s problems alone.
~~~
I had a little Sorrow,
   Born of a little Sin,I found a room all damp with gloom
   And shut us all within;And, "Little Sorrow, weep," said I,"And, Little Sin, pray God to die,And I upon the floor will lie
   And think how bad I've been!"Alas for pious planning —
   It mattered not a whit!As far as gloom went in that room,
   The lamp might have been lit!My Little Sorrow would not weep,My Little Sin would go to sleep —To save my soul I could not keep
   My graceless mind on it!So up I got in anger,
   And took a book I had,And put a ribbon on my hair
   To please a passing lad.And, "One thing there's no getting by —I've been a wicked girl," said I;"But if I can't be sorry, why,
   I might as well be glad!"
~~~
We must not look for poetry in poems.                  —Donald Revell



You must not skirt the issue wearing skirts.You must not duck the bullet using ducks. You must not face the music with your face.Headbutting, don’t use your head. Or your butt.You must not use a house to build a home,and never look for poetry in poems.In fact, inject giraffes into your poems.Let loose the circus monkeys in their skirts.Explain the nest of wood is not a homeat all, but a blind for shooting wild ducks.Grab the shotgun by its metrical butt;aim at your Muse’s quacking, Pringled face.It’s good we’re talking like this, face to face.There should be more headbutting over poems.Citing an 80s brand has its cost buthonors the teenage me, always in skirts,showing my sister how to Be the Duckwith a potato-chip beak. Take me home,Mr. Revell. Or make yourself at homein my postbellum, Reconstruction face—my gray eyes, my rebel ears, all my ducksin the row of a defeated mouth. Poemswere once civil. But war has torn my skirtsoff at the first ruffle, baring my butt
~~~
The tea-kettle bubbled, the tea things were set, The candles were lighted, the ladies were met; The how d’ye’s were over, and entering bustle, The company seated, and silks ceased to rustle: The great Mrs. Consequence opened her fan, And thus the discourse in an instant began (All affected reserve and formality scorning): “I suppose you all saw in the paper this morning A volume of Poems advertised—’tis said They’re produced by the pen of a poor servant-maid.” “A servant write verses!” says Madam Du Bloom: “Pray what is the subject—a Mop, or a Broom?” “He, he, he,” says Miss Flounce: “I suppose we shall see An ode on a Dishclout—what else can it be?” Says Miss Coquettilla, “Why, ladies, so tart? Perhaps Tom the footman has fired her heart; And she’ll tell us how charming he looks in new clothes, And how nimble his hand moves in brushing the shoes; Or how, the last time that he went to May Fair, He bought her some sweethearts of gingerbread ware.” “For my part I think,” says old Lady Marr-joy, “A servant might find herself other employ: Was she mine I’d employ her as long as ’twas light, And send her to bed without candle at night.” “Why so?” says Miss Rhymer, displeased: “I protest ’Tis pity a genius should be so depressed!” “What ideas can such low-bred creatures conceive?” Says Mrs. Noworthy, and laughed in her sleeve. Says old Miss Prudella, “If servants can tell How to write to their mothers, to say they are well, And read of a Sunday The Duty of Man, Which is more I believe than one half of them can; I think ’tis much properer they should rest there, Than be reaching at things so much out of their sphere.” Says old Mrs. Candour, “I’ve now got a maid That’s the plague of my life—a young gossiping jade; There’s no end of the people that after her come, And whenever I’m out, she is never at home; I’d rather ten times she would sit down and write, Than gossip all over the town every night.” “Some whimsical trollop most like,” says Miss Prim, “Has been scribbling of nonsense, just out of a whim, And, conscious it neither is witty nor pretty, Conceals her true name, and ascribes it to Betty.” “I once had a servant myself,” says Miss Pines, “That wrote on a wedding some very good lines.” Says Mrs. Domestic, “And when they were done, I can’t see for my part what use they were on; Had she wrote a receipt, to’ve instructed you how To warm a cold breast of veal, like a ragout, Or to make cowslip wine, that would pass for Champagne, It might have been useful, again and again.” On the sofa was old Lady Pedigree placed; She owned that for poetry she had no taste, That the study of heraldry was more in fashion, And boasted she knew all the crests in the nation. Says Mrs. Routella, “Tom, take out the urn, And stir up the fire, you see it don’t burn.”    The tea-things removed, and the tea-table gone, The card-tables brought, and the cards laid thereon, The ladies, ambitious for each other’s crown, Like courtiers contending for honours, sat down.
~~~
D: The Dreadful Dinotherium he   
Will have to do his best for D.   
The early world observed with awe   
His back, indented like a saw.
His look was gay, his voice was strong;   
His tail was neither short nor long;   
His trunk, or elongated nose,
Was not so large as some suppose;   
His teeth, as all the world allows,   
Were graminivorous, like a cow's.
He therefore should have wished to pass   
Long peaceful nights upon the Grass,   
But being mad the brute preferred
To roost in branches, like a bird.1
A creature heavier than a whale,   
You see at once, could hardly fail
To suffer badly when he slid
And tumbled (as he always did).
His fossil, therefore, comes to light
All broken up: and serve him right.
MORALIf you were born to walk the ground,Remain there; do not fool around.
E stands for Egg.   
MORALThe Moral of this verse Is applicable to the Young. Be terse.
K for the Klondyke, a Country of Gold,   
Where the winters are often excessively cold;
Where the lawn every morning is covered with rime,   
And skating continues for years at a time.   
Do you think that a Climate can conquer the grit   
Of the Sons of the West? Not a bit! Not a bit!   
When the weather looks nippy, the bold Pioneers   
Put on two pairs of Stockings and cover their ears,   
And roam through the drear Hyperborean dales   
With a vast apparatus of Buckets and Pails;   
Or wander through wild Hyperborean glades
With Hoes, Hammers, Pickaxes, Mattocks and Spades.   
There are some who give rise to exuberant mirth   
By turning up nothing but bushels of earth,   
While those who have little cause excellent fun   
By attempting to pilfer from those who have none.   
At times the reward they will get for their pains   
Is to strike very tempting auriferous veins;   
Or, a shaft being sunk for some miles in the ground,   
Not infrequently nuggets of value are found.   
They bring us the gold when their labours are ended,   
And we—after thanking them prettily—spend it.
MORALJust you work for Humanity, never you mind   
If Humanity seems to have left you behind. 
~~~
A physician of eminence, some years ago,
 Was called in, to attend on a lady of fashion,Who had long been admired — and the toast of each beau,
 Tho’ now, her sunk features excited compassion.The doctor no sooner the lady had eyed,
 Than he begged, ‘She for once would his freedom forgiveIf he stepped from the rules of good breeding aside,
 To mention the terms on which she might live.’‘By all means,’ cried the lady, ‘for surely no word
 A physician may utter, should e’er give offence;Punctilio, in illness, is always absurd,
 And shows either doctor, or patient wants sense.’‘Why then, my dear lady, I cannot resist
 Pronouncing this truth, like a plain honest man;That if, in the use of white paint you persist
 No medicine will save you, do all that I can.’‘You astonish me, Doctor! but, such is my case,
 That I may as well die, as leave painting alone;For, should I appear with my natural face   Amongst my acquaintance — I should not be known.’
~~~
The Whale that wanders round the Pole   
   Is not a table fish.
You cannot bake or boil him whole,   
   Nor serve him in a dish;
But you may cut his blubber up
   And melt it down for oil,
And so replace the colza bean
   (A product of the soil).
These facts should all be noted down   
   And ruminated on,
By every boy in Oxford town
   Who wants to be a Don.
~~~
These be two
Country women.
What a size!
Great big arms
And round red faces;
Big substantial
Sit down places;
Great big bosoms firm as cheese
Bursting through their country jackets;
Wide big laps
And sturdy knees;
Hands outspread,
Round and rosy,
Hands to hold
A country posy
Or a baby or a lamb—
      And such eyes!
Stupid, shifty, small and sly
Peeping through a slit of sty,
Squinting through their neighbours’ plackets.
~~~
There are two kinds of people, soldiers and women,
as Virginia Woolf said. Both for decoration only.
Now that is too kind. It’s technical: virgins and wolves.
We have choices now. Two little girls walk into a bar,
one orders a shirley temple. Shirley Temple’s pimp
comes over and says you won’t be sorry. She’s a fine
piece of work but she don’t come cheap. Myself, I’m
in less fear of predators than of walking around
in my mother’s body. That’s sneaky, that’s more
than naked. Let’s even it up: you go on fuming in your
gray room. I am voracious alone. Blank and loose,
metallic lingerie. And rare black-tipped cigarettes
in a handmade basket case. Which of us weaves
the world together with a quicker blur of armed
seduction: your war-on-thugs, my body stockings.
Ascetic or carnivore. Men will crack your glaze
even if you leave them before morning. Pigs
ride the sirens in packs. Ah, flesh, technoflesh,
there are two kinds of people. Hot with mixed
light, drunk on insult. You and me.
~~~
A Sestina



We are the smiling comfortable homes With happy families enthroned therein, Where baby souls are brought to meet the world, Where women end their duties and desires, For which men labor as the goal of life, That people worship now instead of God. Do we not teach the child to worship God? — Whose soul’s young range is bounded by the homes Of those he loves, and where he learns that life Is all constrained to serve the wants therein, Domestic needs and personal desires, — These are the early limits of his world. And are we not the woman’s perfect world, Prescribed by nature and ordained of God, Beyond which she can have no right desires, No need for service other than in homes? For doth she not bring up her young therein? And is not rearing young the end of life? And man? What other need hath he in life Than to go forth and labor in the world, And struggle sore with other men therein? Not to serve other men, nor yet his God, But to maintain these comfortable homes, – The end of all a normal man’s desires. Shall not the soul’s most measureless desires Learn that the very flower and fruit of life Lies all attained in comfortable homes, With which life’s purpose is to dot the world And consummate the utmost will of God, By sitting down to eat and drink therein. Yea, in the processes that work therein —   Fulfilment of our natural desires —   Surely man finds the proof that mighty God For to maintain and reproduce his life Created him and set him in the world; And this high end is best attained in homes. Are we not homes? And is not all therein? Wring dry the world to meet our wide desires! We crown all life! We are the aim of God!
~~~
Inexplicable, the sign outside a deli scrawled
with FLOWERS
                                 and below that: ALWAYS.
But there were no flowers. And I have never
seen an Always. I would like to,
                                              and I have looked.
I have kept my eye keen
                                        for Always, have liked
its idea like an expensive purse, coveting it as
it appears,
            riding the arms of rich ladies who are
so very lady.                      I've rolled on velvet
            cushions where I heard Always slept,
and I once tried to kiss Always,
                  but I don't think it was the Always
I was looking for.
I like your Always, it looks
such a demanding pet. It looks like it kisses
nice and soft.
                         It looks like the bruise I found
flowering on my knee.
                                    I fell down at your voice.
Not to worry, I got right back up, walked ten
more blocks
                     and by then I was halfway home.
I knock my knees blue
                                         and scabbed crawling
toward you, wanting flowers,
                               and always, always, always
to slide against the cold vinyl of a car's seat,
your pale hands
                            on the bare backs of my legs,
that's one Always I want, and whoever knew
there were so many species
                              of Always? Your bare hands
on the pale backs
                            of my thighs, printing bruise,
and if you said Flowers, said Always and we
could erect a forever
                                    of something like sheets
                         and breakfast and an ordinary
day, my eyes would
                always slide across the table toward
you,
       to warm their twin marbles in your palm,
my face would flower
                          for you daily, so that when we
die, roses might petal
                                themselves out our throats.
~~~
Yes, nonsense is a treasure!   I love it from my heart; The only earthly pleasure    That never will depart. But, as for stupid reason,     That stalking, ten-foot rule, She’s always out of season,     A tedious, testy fool. She’s like a walking steeple,     With a clock for face and eyes, Still bawling to all people,    Time bids us to be wise. While nonsense on the spire     A weathercock you’ll find, Than reason soaring higher,     And changing with the wind. The clock too oft deceives,     Says what it cannot prove; While every one believes     The vane that turns above. Reason oft speaks unbidden,     And chides us to our face; For which she should be chidden,     And taught to know her place. While nonsense smiles and chatters,     And says such charming things, Like youthful hope she flatters;     And like a syren sings. Her charm’s from fancy borrowed,     For she is fancy’s pet; Her name is on her forehead,     In rainbow colors set. Then, nonsense let us cherish,     Far, far from reason’s light; Lest in her light she perish,    And vanish from our sight.
~~~
Roger a doleful widower,
 Full eighteen weeks had been,When he, to meet the milk-maid Nell
 Came smiling o’er the green.Blithe as a lad of seventeen,
 He thus accosted Nell;Give me your pail, I’ll carry it
 For you, if you think well.Says Nell, indeed my milking-pail
 You shall not touch, I vow;I’ve carried it myself before,
 And I can carry it now.So side by side they walked awhile,
 Then he at last did say;My inclination is to come
 And see you, if I may.Nell understood his meaning well,
 And briskly answered she;You may see me at any time,
 If you look where I be.Says he, but hear me yet awhile,
 I’ve something more to tell;I gladly would a sweetheart be
 Unto you, Mistress Nell.A sweetheart I don’t want, says Nell,
 Kind Sir, and if you do,Another you may seek, for I
 Am not the lass for you.When she had made him this reply,
 He’d nothing more to sayBut — Nelly, as good night to you,
 And homeward went his way.
~~~
With her one horrid eye persistently unfastened, a vigilant bird watched my grandfather during the Great Depression use each evening of one whole year to wander his corn fields knowing this world is just one pig after another in one pen after another. Therefore, the bird heard him suppose, shouldn’t he with his best gun, machete, Buick, or rope terminate his acquaintance with the tiresome setup of breakfast-lunch-dinner-dawn-dusk-fall-winter-spring-summer- blah-blah-blah? But his girls were good-looking and made such fine pies, so the bird watched him live wretchedly until he died more naturally of cancer too soon to see his people become the dopefiends, doctor-haters, masturbators, insomniacs, sleep fanatics, shut-ins, and teetotalers the bird knew they would become, for the purpose of girls is to just ruin everything with wanton reproduction so that now now now it’s really relentless—how heavy his people got in their limbs and how torrential, thus, the frenzied wind, though beyond the eye of the bird is the small, ashen brain of the bird, and below that, a heart, I swear, through which come the iffy notes of this cruel song. 
~~~
is that you can never see the one you're wearing,
that no one believes the lies they tell,
that they grow to be more famous than you,
that you could die in one but you won't be buried in it.
That we use them to create dogs
in our own image. That the dogs
in their mortarboards and baseball caps and veils
crush our hubris with their unconcern.
That Norma Desmond's flirty cocktail hat flung aside
left a cowlick that doomed her. That two old ladies
catfighting in Hutzler's Better Dresses both wore flowered
straw. Of my grandmother the amateur hatmaker,
this legend: that the holdup man at the Mercantile
turned to say Madam I love your hat before
he shot the teller dead who'd giggled at her
homemade velvet roses. O happy tragedy of hats!
That they make us mimic classic gestures,
inspiring pleasure first, then pity and then fear.
See how we tip them, hold them prettily against the wind
or pull them off and mop our sweaty brows
like our beloved foolish dead in photographs.
Like farmers plowing under the ancient sun.
~~~
The happy ones are almost always also vulgar; happiness has a way of thinking that's rushed and has no time to look but keeps on moving, compact and manic, with contempt in passing for the dying: Get on with your life, come on, buck up! Those stilled by pain don't mix with the cheerful, self-assured runners but with those who walk at the same slow pace. If one wheel locks and the other's turning the turning one doesn't stop turning but goes as far as it can, dragging the other in a poor, skewed race until the cart either comes to a halt or falls apart.
~~~
I’ll snip your hair   Cut it all off until you look like a man   I will replace your weight loss bars with bars to make you gain   I will cut your credit cards in half   I will shrink all your clothes   Every trick in the book I will try   I will give all your shoes to the dog   I will do it all   Crazy is where you will be driven   Off a cliff you will want to jump   Then when I am all done   I will look at you with big doughy eyes   And I will say I am sorry   But I have my fingers crossed   
~~~
This rose-tree is not made to bear The violet blue, nor lily fair,    Nor the sweet mignionet: And if this tree were discontent, Or wished to change its natural bent,    It all in vain would fret. And should it fret, you would suppose It ne’er had seen its own red rose,    Nor after gentle shower Had ever smelled its rose’s scent, Or it could ne’er be discontent    With its own pretty flower. Like such a blind and senseless tree As I’ve imagined this to be,    All envious persons are: With care and culture all may find Some pretty flower in their own mind,    Some talent that is rare.
~~~
I’ll go anywhere to leave you but come with me.
All the cities are like you anyway. Windows
darken when I get close enough to see.
Any place we want to stay’s polluted,
the good spots taken already by those
who ruin them. And restaurants we’d never find.
We’d rut a ditch by a river in nights
so long they must be cut by the many pairs
of wrong-handled scissors maybe god owns
and doesn’t share. I water god.
I make a haunted lake and rinse and rinse.
I take what I want, and have ever since what
I want disappeared, like anything hunted.
That’s what you said. Disappointment
isn’t tender, dried and wide instead.
The tourists snapped you crying,
and the blanket I brought was so dirty
it must have been lying around
in lice and blood that whole year we fought.
It wasn’t clear, so I forgot.
I haven’t been sleeping, next to you
twitching to bury my boring eyes.
The ship made you sad, and the ferry, and canoe.
All boats do.
~~~
I ask not wit, nor beauty do I crave,
Nor wealth, nor pompous titles wish to have;
But since, 'tis doomed through all degrees of life,
Whether a daughter, sister, or a wife;
That females should the stronger males obey,
And yield implicit to their lordly sway;
Since this, I say, is ev'ry woman's fate,
Give me a mind to suit my slavish state.
~~~
Customs and chemistry made a name for themselves and it was Spot. He's gone to some utopos now, the dirty dog, doctor of  crotches, digger of holes. Your airy clarities be damned,  he loved our must and our mistakes — why hit him, then, who did us good? He's dead, he ought to be at home. He's damned  put out, and so am I.  *       *       * When blue is carried out, the law is red. When noon is said and done, it's dusk again. The greed for table makes the greed for bed.  So cave canem, even stars have litters — little  lookers, cacklers, killers . . . Morning raises up  the hackled men. (What's  milk, among our ilk, but  opportunity for spillers?)  *       *       * He saved our sorry  highfalutin souls — the heavens haven't saved a fly. Orion's  canniness who can condone? — that starring story, strapping blade! —  and Sirius is  just a Fido joke — no laughter shakes the firmament. But O the family dog, the Buddha-dog — son of a bitch! he had a funny bone —
~~~
You jerk you didn't call me up
I haven't seen you in so long
You probably have a fucking tan
& besides that instead of making love tonight
You're drinking your parents to the airport
I'm through with you bourgeois boys
All you ever do is go back to ancestral comforts
Only money can get—even Catullus was rich but
Nowadays you guys settle for a couch
By a soporific color cable t.v. set
Instead of any arc of love, no wonder
The G.I. Joe team blows it every other time
Wake up! It's the middle of the night
You can either make love or die at the hands of the Cobra Commander
_________________
To make love, turn to page 121.
To die, turn to page 172.
~~~
Everything about the young foreign taxidermist was overdone. Did he absolutely have to wear the apron with the tiny red castles in the shop? Or weave, at night, in and out of the trees? I don’t think so. I would bring him buckets of ice water day after day hoping he would just cool off a bit. Fact is, he never did. But to be fair, he really was practicing what the papers called, “heroic medicine.” It was love. I admit it. It was fancy love. I was the envy of the world, being hitched up with such a genius, and that felt good. Of course, these days, I can’t touch rope or a small child without thinking of him. Without expecting his large hands to come out of nowhere. We were, as mother said, both “slowly losing our minds.” He’d talk for hours about hygiene, the Water Cure for example, and wrote an award-winning essay on the Electric Bath as a way to treat hysteria in the female fox. “Too many foxes,” he would say, shaking his fist, “too many foxes running around like chickens with their heads cut off.” In the winter months we would ride our bicycles down to the scrap-metal yard where he would make love to me in devout silence. The delight in his eyes when he found that small cage! He was both tender and rough, and I had never, and will never again, be as touched by another man. I didn’t notice the black mustache growing slowly but unmercifully on his left shoulder until two or three years into the affair. At first it seemed harmless. A small patch of dead grass. But eventually I couldn’t help but only see the large dark field. Its silent twitching. By then it was already early fall, and the fact is, it tore us apart.
~~~
                           Does Rhea think? Does Rhea think?Does Rhea think? Does Rhea think?                                 Does Rhea think?                           Does Rhea think? Does Rhea think?Does Rhea think? Does Rhea think?                                 Does Rhea think? 
~~~
We were told that the cloud cover was a blanket
about to settle into the shape of the present
which, if we wanted to imagine it
as a person, would undoubtedly look startled—
as after a verbal berating
or in advance of a light pistol-whipping.
The camera came and went, came and went,
like a masked man trying to light a too-damp fuse.
The crew was acting like a litter of mimics
trying to make a killing.
Anything to fill the vacuum of time.
The wind whirred and tracked the clouds.
The credits, we were told, would take the form
of a semi-scrawl, urban-sprawl, graffiti-style
typography. The soundtrack would include
instrumental versions of "Try a Little Tenderness."
Our handler, who was walking backward
in order to maintain constant eye contact with us,
nearly stumbled over a girl in a sheath and pearls
who was misting a shelf of hothouse flowers.
While the two apologized to each other,
we stood and watched the fine spray settle
over the leaves and drip onto the floor.
On the way out, we passed a door
with a small window reinforced with wired glass
through which we could see a nurse
positioning a patient on a table. We swore
afterward we'd heard her say, "Lie perfectly still
and look only inward." A clock chimed and
as the others were audibly counting backwards
from five to zero, I thought I heard someone say,
"Now let go of this morbid attachment to things."
 
~~~
Be kind and tender to the Frog,
   And do not call him names,
As ‘Slimy skin,’ or ‘Polly-wog,’
   Or likewise ‘Ugly James,’
Or ‘Gape-a-grin,’ or ‘Toad-gone-wrong,’   
   Or ‘Billy Bandy-knees’:
The Frog is justly sensitive
   To epithets like these.
No animal will more repay
   A treatment kind and fair;
At least so lonely people say
Who keep a frog (and, by the way,   
They are extremely rare).
~~~
I dunno yer highfalutin' words, but here's th' way it seems
When I'm peekin' out th' winder o' my little House o Dreams;
I've been lookin' 'roun' this big ol' world, as bizzy as a hive,
An' I want t' tell ye, neighbor mine, it's good t' be alive.
I've ben settin' here, a-thinkin' hard, an' say, it seems t' me
That this big ol' world is jest about as good as it kin be,
With its starvin' little babies, an' its battles, an' its strikes,
An' its profiteers, an' hold-up men—th' dawggone little tykes!
An' its hungry men that fought fer us, that nobody employs.
An' I think, "Why, shucks, we're jest a lot o' grown-up little boys!"
An' I settle back, an' light my pipe, an' reach fer Mother's hand,
An' I wouldn't swap my peace o' mind fer nothin' in the land;
Fer this world uv ours, that jest was made fer folks like me an' you
Is a purty good ol' place t' live—say, neighbor, ain't it true?
~~~
ROXANA from the court retiring late,Sigh'd her soft sorrows at St. JAMES's gate:Such heavy thoughts lay brooding in her breast,Not her own chairmen wth more weight opprest;They groan the cruel load they're doom'd to bear ;She in these gentler sounds express'd her care." Was it for this, that I these Roses wear," For this new-set my Jewels for my hair ?" Ah ! Princess ! with what zeal have I pursu'd !" Almost forgot the duty of a Prude." Thinking I never cou'd attend too soon," I've miss'd my prayers, to get me dress'd by noon." For Thee, ah ! what for Thee did I resign ?" My Pleasures, Passions, all that e'er was mine." I sacrific'd both Modesty and Ease," Left Operas, and went to filthy Plays ;" Double entendres shock'd my tender ear," Yet even this for Thee I chose to bear." In glowing youth, when nature bids be gay," And ev'ry joy of life before me lay," By honour prompted, and by pride restrain'd," The pleasures of the young my soul disdain'd :" Sermons I sought, and with a mien severe" Censur'd my neighbours, and said daily pray'r." Alas ! how chang'd! — with the same sermon mien " That once I pray'd, the What-d'ye call't I've seen." Ah ! cruel Princess, for thy sake I've lost" That reputation which so dear had cost :" I, who avoided ev'ry publick place," When bloom, and beauty bid me show my face ;" Now near Thee constant ev'ry night abide" With never-failing duty by thy side," Myself and daughters standing on a row," To all the foreigners a goodly show !" Oft had your drawing-room been sadly thin," And merchants wives close by the chair had been seen ;" Had not I amply fill'd the empty space," And sav'd your Highness from the dire disgrace." Yet COQUETILLA's artifice prevails," When all my merit and my duty fails :" That COQUETILLA, whose deluding airs" Corrupts our virgins, and our youth ensnares ;" So sunk her character, so lost her fame," Scarce visited before your Highness came ;" Yet for the Bed-chamber 'tis Her you chuse," When Zeal and Fame and Virtue you refuse." Ah ! worthy choice ! not one of all your train" Whom censure blasts not, and dishonours stain." Let the nice hind now suckle dirty pigs," And the proud pea-hen snatch the cuckoo's eggs !" Let IRIS leave her paint, and own her age," And grave SUFFOLKIA wed a giddy page !" A greater miracle is daily view'd," A virtuous Princess with a court so lewd." I know thee, Court ! with all thy treach'rous wiles," Thy false caresses and undoing smiles !" Ah ! Princess, learn'd in all the courtly arts" To cheat our hopes, and yet to gain our hearts." Large lovely bribes are the great statesman's aim ;" And the neglected patriot follows fame." The Prince is ogled ; some the King pursue ;" But your ROXANA only follows YOU." Despis'd ROXANA, cease, and try to find" Some other, since the Princess proves unkind :" Perhaps it is not hard to find at court" If not a greater, a more firm support.
~~~
It’s like being lost in the forest, hungry, with a plump live chicken in your cradling arms: you want to savage the bird, but you also want the eggs. You go weak on your legs. What’s worse, what you need most is the companionship, but you’re too hungry to know that. That is something you only know after you’ve been lost a lot and always, eventually, alit upon your bird; consumed her before you’d realized what a friend she’d been, letting you sleep-in late on the forest floor though she herself awoke at the moment of dawn and thought of long-lost rooster voices quaking the golden straw. She looks over at you, sleeping, and what can I tell you, she loves you, but like a friend. Eventually, when lost in a forest with a friendly chicken you make a point of emerging from the woods together, triumphant; her, fat with bugs, you, lean with berries. Still, while you yet wander, you can not resist telling her your joke: Guy sees a pig with three legs, asks the farmer, What gives? Farmer says, That pig woke my family from a fire, got us all out. Says the guy, And lost the leg thereby? Nope, says the farmer, Still had all four when he took  a bullet for me when I had  my little struggle with the law. Guy nods, So that’s where  he lost his paw? Farmer shakes it off, says, Nah, we fixed him up. A pause, guy says, So how’d he lose  the leg? Farmer says, Well, hell, a pig like that  you don’t eat all at once. Chicken squints. Doesn’t think it’s funny.
~~~
My own dear love, he is strong and bold
      And he cares not what comes after.
His words ring sweet as a chime of gold,
      And his eyes are lit with laughter.
He is jubilant as a flag unfurled—
      Oh, a girl, she’d not forget him.
My own dear love, he is all my world,—
      And I wish I’d never met him.
My love, he’s mad, and my love, he’s fleet,
      And a wild young wood-thing bore him!
The ways are fair to his roaming feet,
      And the skies are sunlit for him.
As sharply sweet to my heart he seems
      As the fragrance of acacia.
My own dear love, he is all my dreams,—
      And I wish he were in Asia.
My love runs by like a day in June,
      And he makes no friends of sorrows.
He’ll tread his galloping rigadoon
      In the pathway of the morrows.
He’ll live his days where the sunbeams start,
      Nor could storm or wind uproot him.
My own dear love, he is all my heart,—
      And I wish somebody’d shoot him.
~~~
As a friend to the children commend me the Yak.   
   You will find it exactly the thing:
It will carry and fetch, you can ride on its back,   
   Or lead it about with a string.
The Tartar who dwells on the plains of Thibet   
   (A desolate region of snow)
Has for centuries made it a nursery pet,   
   And surely the Tartar should know!
Then tell your papa where the Yak can be got,   
   And if he is awfully rich
He will buy you the creature—or else he will not.
   (I cannot be positive which.)
~~~
—After Catullus



My house disgusted me, so I slept in a tent.
My tent disgusted me, so I slept in the grass. The grass disgusted me,
so I slept in my body, which I strung like a hammock from two ropes.
My body disgusted me, so I carved myself out of it.
 
My use of knives disgusted me because it was an act of violence.
My weakness disgusted me because “Hannah” means “hammer.”
The meaning of my name disgusted me because I’d rather be known
as beautiful. My vanity disgusted me because I am a scholar.
 
My scholarship disgusted me because knowledge is empty.
My emptiness disgusted me because I wanted to be whole.
My wholeness would have disgusted me because to be whole
is to be smug. Still, I tried to understand wholeness
 
as the inclusiveness of all activities: I walked out into the yard,
trying to vomit and drink milk simultaneously. I tried to sleep
while smoking a cigar. I have enough regrets to crack all the plumbing.
I’m whole only in that I’ve built my person from every thought I’ve ever loved.
~~~
A youth for Jane with ardour sighed,
 The maid with sparkling eye;But to his vows she still replied,
 ‘I’ll hear you by and by.’‘Suspense (he cries) my bloom decays,
 And bids my spirits fly;Now hear my vows,’ — but still she says,
 ‘I’ll hear you by and by.’At length her frowns his love subdue,
 He shuns her scornful eye,And Emma seeks, who’ll hear him woo
 Both now, and by and by.And soon to church he leads the maid,
 When lo! he sees draw nigh,The now repentant fair who said
 She’d hear him by and by.‘Hear me (she cries): no more in vain
 Thy hear for me shall sigh!’ —
 ‘I’m busy now (said he) — but, Jane!
 I’ll hear you by and by.’
~~~
Protestants pray for grace, Scientists look to space. Jews find truth in the Torah, New Agers, in each other's aura. Catholics are blessed by a Pope, Yaquis enlightened by dope. Maoris use ritual chants, Navahos get up and dance. Muslims bow daily to Allah, Norsemen aspire to Valhalla. Feminists swear by a She, Quakers swear not, silently. Confucians kowtow to ancestors, Hare Krishnas, to airport investors. Hindus revere Lord Brahma, Richard Gere, the Dalai Lama. Baptists believe in the Ark, Physicists, in the quark. Moonies obey Reverend Sun, Mormons say Brigham's the one. Daoists extol yang and yin, Sufis transcend in a spin. Shintos seek peace where it's grassy, Rastas, in Haile Selassie. When we meet in the Afterlife, We can laugh at sectarian strife. But meanwhile back to the wars, 'Cause my God's better than yours.
~~~
I whole in body, and in mind,       but very weak in purse, Do make, and write my testament       for fear it will be worse. And first I wholly do commend       my soul and body eke, To God the Father and the Son,       so long as I can speak. And after speech, my soul to him,       and body to the grave, Till time that all shall rise again,       their Judgement for to have, And then I hope they both shall meet,       to dwell for aye in joy; Whereas I trust to see my friends       released from all annoy. Thus have you heard touching my soul,       and body what I mean: I trust you all will witness bear,       I have a steadfast brain. O God, now let me dispose such things,       as I shall leave behind, That those which shall receive the same,       may know my willing mind. I first of all to London leave,       because I there was bred, Brave buildings rare, of churches store,       and Paul’s to the head. Between the same, fair treats there be,       and people goodly store; Because their keeping craveth cost,       I yet will leave him more. First for their food, I butchers leave,       that every day shall kill; By Thames you shall have brewers’ store,       and bakers at your will. And such as orders do observe,       and eat fish thrice a week, I leave two streets, full fraught therewith,       they need not far to seek. Watling Street, and Canwick Street,       I full of woolen leave; And linen store in Friday Street,       if they me not deceive. And those which are of calling such,       that costlier they require, I mercers leave, with silk so rich,       as any would desire. In Cheap of them, they store shall find,       and likewise in that street, I goldsmiths leave, with jewels such,       as are for ladies meet.                      * * * Now when the folk are fed and clad       with such as I have named, For dainty mouths, and stomachs weak       some junckets must be framed. Wherefore I potecaries leave,       with banquets in their shop, Physicians also for the sick,       Diseases for to stop. Some roysters still must bide in thee,       and such as cut it out; That with the guiltless quarrel will,       to let their blood about. For them I cunning surgeons leave,       some plasters to apply, That ruffians may not still be hanged,        nor quiet persons die.                      * * * To all the bookbinders by Paul’s,        because I like their art, They every week shall money have,       when they from books depart. Among them all, my printer must       have somewhat to his share; I will my friends these books to buy       of him, with other ware. For maidens poor, I widowers rich        do leave, that oft shall dote: And by that means shall marry them,       to set the girls afloat. And wealthy widows will I leave       to help young gentlemen; Which when you have, in any case,       be courteous to them then: And see their plate and jewels eke       may not be marred with rust; Nor let their bags too long be full,       for fear that they do burst.                      * * * And Bedlam must not be forgot,       for that was oft my walk: I people there too many leave,       that out of tune do talk.                      * * * At th’ Inns of Court, I lawyers leave       to take their case in hand. And also leave I at each Inn       of Court, or Chancery, Of gentlemen, a youthful roote,       full of activity, For whom I store of books have left,        at each bookbinder’s stall: And part of all that London hath,       to furnish them withal. And when they are with study cloyed,       to recreate their mind, Of tennis courts, of dancing schools,       and fence they store shall find. And every Sunday at the least,       I leave to make them sport, In divers places players, that       of wonders shall report. Now, London, have I (for thy sake)       within thee, and without, As comes into my memory,       dispersèd ’round about Such needful things as they should have,       here left now unto thee; When I am gone, with conscience,       let them dispersèd be. And though I nothing namèd have,       to bury me withal, Consider that above the ground,       annoyance be I shall. And let me have a shrouding sheet       to cover me from shame, And in oblivion bury me,       and never more me name. Ringings nor other ceremonies       use you not for cost, Nor at my burial, make no feast,       your money were but lost.                      * * * This XX of October, I,       in ANNO DOMINI, A thousand, v. hundred seventy-three,       as almanacs descry, Did write this will with mine own hand,       and it to London gave; In witness of the standers-by,       whose names, if you will have, paper, pen and standish were,       at that same present by, With Time, who promised to reveal       so fast as she could buy The same, lest of my nearer kin       for any thing should vary; So finally I make an end       no longer can I tarry.
~~~
Houses red as flower of bean,Flickering leaves and shadows lean!Pantalone, like a parrot,Sat and grumbled in the garret—Sat and growled and grumbled till Moon upon the window-sillLike a red geraniumScented his bald cranium.Said Brighella, meaning well:“Pack your box and—go to Hell!Heat will cure your rheumatism!” . . .Silence crowned this optimism—Not a sound and not a wail:But the fire (lush leafy vales)Watched the angry feathers fly.Pantalone ’gan to cry—Could not, would not, pack his box!Shadows (curtseying hens and cocks)Pecking in the attic gloomTried to smother his tail-plume . . .Till a cockscomb candle-flameCrowing loudly, died: Dawn came.
~~~
               (A Pantoum)



Of making many books there is no end,    Though myriads have to deep oblivion gone; Each day new manuscripts are being penned,    And still the ceaseless tide of ink flows on. Though myriads have to deep oblivion gone,    New volumes daily issue from the press; And still the ceaseless tide of ink flows on—    The prospect is disheartening, I confess. New volumes daily issue from the press;    My pile of unread books I view aghast. The prospect is disheartening, I confess;    Why will these modern authors write so fast? My pile of unread books I view aghast—   Of course I must keep fairly up to date— Why will these modern authors write so fast?    They seem to get ahead of me of late. Of course I must keep fairly up to date;    The books of special merit I must read; They seem to get ahead of me of late,    Although I skim them very fast indeed. The books of special merit I must read;    And then the magazines come round again; Although I skim them very fast indeed,    I can’t get through with more than eight or ten. And then the magazines come round again!    How can we stem this tide of printer’s ink? I can’t get through with more than eight or ten—    It is appalling when I stop to think. How can we stem this tide of printer’s ink?    Of making many books there is no end. It is appalling when I stop to think    Each day new manuscripts are being penned!
~~~
I plan to be the world authority on peafowl. Believe I'll be offered a chair someday at the chicken college. —Flannery O'Connor



Certainly are niceto want to give me that dog.I raise peacocks—you can't keep dogsand them on the same place.People come herehave to leave the dog in the car else the peachickens take to the treeswith nervous prostrations.I have twenty-seven. Placesounds like a jungleat night. They yelland scream at the leastatmospheric disturbanceor mechanical noise.Sitting on the back steps, I spenddays studying howthey could decoratethe lawn to advantage. They preferto sit on the tractors,the top of the chickenhouse or garbage can lid. I adjustto their taste, whichis anti-dog. Thanksbut I'll take the thought forthe dog. Appreciateyou wanting to give it.Come visit. Nothing to do herebut sit, walk,collect red bug bites,show you a peacock beforehis tail gets ratty.
~~~
Remote and ineffectual Don
That dared attack my Chesterton,   
With that poor weapon, half-impelled,   
Unlearnt, unsteady, hardly held,   
Unworthy for a tilt with men—
Your quavering and corroded pen;   
Don poor at Bed and worse at Table,
Don pinched, Don starved, Don miserable;   
Don stuttering, Don with roving eyes,   
Don nervous, Don of crudities;   
Don clerical, Don ordinary,
Don self-absorbed and solitary;   
Don here-and-there, Don epileptic;   
Don puffed and empty, Don dyspeptic;   
Don middle-class, Don sycophantic,   
Don dull, Don brutish, Don pedantic;
Don hypocritical, Don bad,
Don furtive, Don three-quarters mad;   
Don (since a man must make an end),   
Don that shall never be my friend.
*       *       *
Don different from those regal Dons!   
With hearts of gold and lungs of bronze,   
Who shout and bang and roar and bawl   
The Absolute across the hall,   
Or sail in amply billowing gown   
Enormous through the Sacred Town,   
Bearing from College to their homes   
Deep cargoes of gigantic tomes;   
Dons admirable! Dons of Might!   
Uprising on my inward sight   
Compact of ancient tales, and port   
And sleep—and learning of a sort.   
Dons English, worthy of the land;   
Dons rooted; Dons that understand.   
Good Dons perpetual that remain   
A landmark, walling in the plain—
The horizon of my memories—   
Like large and comfortable trees.
*       *       *
Don very much apart from these,
Thou scapegoat Don, thou Don devoted,   
Don to thine own damnation quoted,   
Perplexed to find thy trivial name   
Reared in my verse to lasting shame.   
Don dreadful, rasping Don and wearing,   
Repulsive Don—Don past all bearing.
Don of the cold and doubtful breath,   
Don despicable, Don of death;   
Don nasty, skimpy, silent, level;   
Don evil; Don that serves the devil.   
Don ugly—that makes fifty lines.   
There is a Canon which confines   
A Rhymed Octosyllabic Curse   
If written in Iambic Verse
To fifty lines. I never cut;
I far prefer to end it—but
Believe me I shall soon return.
My fires are banked, but still they burn   
To write some more about the Don   
That dared attack my Chesterton.
~~~
I love him so, this creature I do pray was treated kindly. I will pay as much as pig-lovers see fit to guarantee him that. As for his fat,  I’d give up years yes years of my  own life for such a gulpable semblable.  (My life! Such as it is! This liberality of leaves! The world won’t need those seventeen more poems, after all, there being so few subjects to be treated. Three if by subject we mean anyone submitted to another’s will. Two if by subject we mean  topic. One if by death we wind up meaning love. And none if a subject  must entail the curlicue’s indulgence of itself.)