
~~~
A thin wet sky, that yellows at the rim,
And meets with sun-lost lip the marsh’s brim.
The pools low lying, dank with moss and mould,
Glint through their mildews like large cups of gold.
Among the wild rice in the still lagoon,
In monotone the lizard shrills his tune.
The wild goose, homing, seeks a sheltering,
Where rushes grow, and oozing lichens cling.
Late cranes with heavy wing, and lazy flight,
Sail up the silence with the nearing night.
And like a spirit, swathed in some soft veil,
Steals twilight and its shadows o’er the swale.
Hushed lie the sedges, and the vapours creep,
Thick, grey and humid, while the marshes sleep.
~~~
I know a little what it is like, once here at high tide
Stranded, for them to be so attached to the bottom’s
Sarcophagus lids, up to their brown green gold wine
Bottle necks in the prevailing booze, riding, as far
As we can see, like a picnic on a blanket.
Whatever plucks them from below the red horizon
Like snapped pulleys and ropes for the pyramidal effort
Of the moon, they come in, they come through the breakers,
Heaps of hair, writing across the beach a collapsed
Script, signers of a huge independence.
Melville thought them pure, bitter, seeing the fog-sized
Flies dancing stiff and renaissance above. But I
Have eaten nori and dulse, and to have gone deep
Before being cast out leaves hardly a taste of loneliness.
And I take in their iodine.
~~~
How much greener is paint than grass, especially in winter.
~~~
                      based on photographs from Rural Japan:
                      Radiance of the Ordinary
 




/ afloat
two boats with no riders
still moving on water
the hulls barely touching
each with a single oar
safely propped
so it won’t fall
/ lotus leaves
close into themselves
at night
on their wide folded backs
water beads
inside, their sleeping
flowers
/ inside
do the carp
just below the water’s stillness
see the pines
/ fall daikon
just pulled from the soil
these pungent roots
hang from bamboo poles
their white tubed bodies
bend as if slightly aroused
each ripe radish will
be drenched
in salt
then eaten raw
all winter
/ lone pine
ancient tree
with so many tongues
how long this throated stem
this stillness before rain
~~~
The young man, hardly more
than a boy, who fired the shot
had looked at him with an air
not of anger but of concentration,
as if he were surveying a road,
or feeding a length of wood into a saw:
It had to be done just so.
The bullet passed through
his upper chest, below the collar bone.
The pain was not what he might
have feared. Strangely exhilarated
he staggered out of the pasture
and into a grove of trees.
He pressed and pressed
the wound, trying to stanch
the blood, but he could only press
what he could reach, and he could
not reach his back, where the bullet
had exited.
                     He lay on the earth
smelling the leaves and mosses,
musty and damp and cool
after the blaze of open afternoon.
How good the earth smelled,
as it had when he was a boy
hiding from his father,
who was intent of strapping him
for doing his chores
late one time too many.
A cowbird razzed from a rail fence.
It isn't mockery, he thought,
no malice in it. . . just a noise.
Stray bullets nicked the oaks
overhead. Leaves and splinters fell.
Someone near him groaned.
But it was his own voice he heard.
His fingers and feet tingled,
the roof of his mouth,
and the bridge of his nose. . . .
He became dry, dry, and thought
of Christ, who said, I thirst.
His man-smell, the smell of his hair
and skin, his sweat, the salt smell
of his cock and the little ferny hairs
that two women had known
left him, and a sharp, almost sweet
smell began to rise from his open mouth
in the warm shade of the oaks.
A streak of sun climbed the rough
trunk of a tree, but he did not
see it with his open eye.
~~~
No one wants another paean to a rosy dawn,
so it's good this one's bluish, baby-shade
at the horizon, bleeding up into midnight like
a botched dye job.
And having enough of the old world—larks,
crakes, nightingales, storks—this space
is populated by one fly crabbing
across a notebook page. He seems, like me,
honey-slowed by winter's shortest days, clumsy
and isolated. My love bought a black-and-white
photo once, close-up of a birch trunk,
fly crawling up
the curled paper bark, marring the purity
of the image. You don't notice the fly
until you do, and then you can't stop.
No one wants a fly in art,
but there it is, elegantly framed.
And we're over the epic, so here, first thing
this morning, a pedestrian quarrel. Years ago, I flew
across a mountain range in black coat
and black boots to secretly meet him
in the city. How many dawns did it take to arrive
at this particular? At 9:30 the sky flares
not like flame—a paper fan
you buy in Chinatown for a dollar.
A sudden breeze sways the Tibetan flags strung along
the eaves. I never noticed how thin
the fabric. You can see right through the printed prayers
to the thermometer—
five degrees—and beyond, birches leaning
all to windward. Sun bleaches out
the last mysterious. Now we pray to the real.
                                                             —11.29.2012
~~~
The optimists among ustaking heart because it is springskip alongattending their meetingssigning their e-mail petitionsmarching with their satiric signssinging their we shall overcome songsposting their pungent twitters and blogsbelieving in a better worldfor no good reasonI envy themsaid the old womanThe seasons go round theygo round and aroundsaid the tulipdancing among her friendsin their brown bed in the sunin the April breezeunder a maple canopythat was also dancingonly with greater motionscasting greater shadowsand the grasshardly stirringWhat a concertoof good stinks said the dogtrotting along Riverside Drivein the early spring afternoonsniffing this way and thathow gratifying the cellos of the riverthe tubas of the trafficthe trombonesof the leafing elms with the legatoof my rivals’ piss at their feetand the leftover meat and greasesinging along in all the wastebaskets
~~~
For the graduates of the University of Arizona.



This morning we gather in gratitude for all aspects of sacredness:
the air, the warmth of fire, bodies of water, plants, the land,
and all animals and humankind.
We gather to honor our students who have achieved the extraordinary
accomplishment of earning doctoral or master's degrees.
We gather to honor their parents, grandparents, children,
family members, and friends who have traveled with them
on their path to success. They have traveled far distances to be here
this morning: we honor their devotion.
 
May we remember that holiness exists in the ordinary elements of our lives.
 
We are grateful for a homeland that has always thrived
on a glorious array of people and their diverse cultures, histories,
and beliefs. We acknowledge the generosity of the Tohono O'odham
in granting this land on which we learn, teach, celebrate
accomplishments, and sometimes mourn losses.
 
May we always cherish our ancestors as we prepare for the days ahead.
May we remember that we exist because of their prayers and their faith.
 
We are blessed with distinct and melodious tongues.
Our languages are treasures of stories, songs, ceremonies, and memories.
May each of us remember to share our stories with one another,
because it is only through stories that we live full lives.
 
May the words we speak go forth as bright beads
of comfort, joy, humor, and inspiration.
We have faith that the graduates will inspire others
to explore and follow their interests.
 
Today we reflect a rainbow of creation:
Some of us came from the east, where bright crystals of creativity reside.
They are the white streaks of early morning light when all is born again.
We understand that, in Tucson, the Rincon Mountains are our inspiration
for beginning each day. The Rincons are everlasting and always present.
 
Those who came from the south embody the strength of the blue
mountains that encircle us. The Santa Ritas instill in us
the vigorous spirit of youthful learning.
 
Others came from the west; they are imbued with the quiet, yellow glow of dusk.
They help us achieve our goals. Here in the middle of the valley, the ts'aa',
the basket of life, the Tucson Mountains teach us to value our families.
 
The ones from the north bring the deep, restorative powers of night's darkness;
their presence renews us. The Santa Catalina Mountains teach us that,
though the past may be fraught with sorrow, it was strengthened
by the prayers of our forebearers.
We witnessed the recent fires the mountains suffered,
and in their recovery we see ourselves on our own journeys.
We understand that we are surrounded by mountains, dziił,
and thus that we are made of strength, dziił, nihí níhídziił.
We are strong ourselves. We are surrounded by mountains
that help us negotiate our daily lives.
 
May we always recognize the multitude of gifts that surround us.
May our homes, schools, and communities be filled with the wisdom
and optimism that reflect a generous spirit.
 
We are grateful for all blessings, seen and unseen.
 
May we fulfill the lives envisioned for us at our birth. May we realize
that our actions affect all people and the earth. May we live in the way
of beauty and help others in need. May we always remember that
we were created as people who believe in one another. We are grateful,
Holy Ones, for the graduates, as they will strengthen our future.
 
All is beautiful again.
Hózhǫ́ nááhasdłíí’.
Hózhǫ́ nááhasdłíí’.
Hózhǫ́ nááhasdłíí’.
Hózhǫ́ nááhasdłíí’.
~~~
A black cat among roses, Phlox, lilac-misted under a first-quarter moon, The sweet smells of heliotrope and night-scented stock. The garden is very still,   It is dazed with moonlight, Contented with perfume, Dreaming the opium dreams of its folded poppies. Firefly lights open and vanish   High as the tip buds of the golden glow Low as the sweet alyssum flowers at my feet. Moon-shimmer on leaves and trellises, Moon-spikes shafting through the snow ball bush.   Only the little faces of the ladies’ delight are alert and staring, Only the cat, padding between the roses, Shakes a branch and breaks the chequered pattern As water is broken by the falling of a leaf. Then you come, And you are quiet like the garden, And white like the alyssum flowers,   And beautiful as the silent sparks of the fireflies. Ah, Beloved, do you see those orange lilies? They knew my mother, But who belonging to me will they know When I am gone.
~~~
It began in a foyer of evenings
The evenings left traces of glass in the trees
A book and a footpath we followed
Under throat-pipes of birds
We moved through a room of leaves
Thin streams of silver buried under our eyes
A field of white clover buried under our eyes
Or a river we stopped at to watch
The wind cross it, recross it
Room into room you paused
Where once on a stoop we leaned back
Talking late into daylight
The morning trees shook off twilight
Opening and closing our eyes auroras
Beyond groves and flora we followed a road
Dotted with polished brown bottles,
Scoured furrows, a wood emptied of trees
It was enough to hollow us out
The evenings left grasses half-wild at our feet
Branches with spaces for winds
The earth changes
The way we speak to each other has changed
As for a long while we stood in a hall full of exits
Listening for a landscape beyond us
~~~
A gauze bandage wraps the land
and is unwound, stained orange with sulfates.
A series of slaps molds a mountain,
a fear uncoils itself, testing its long
cool limbs. A passing cloud
seizes up like a carburetor
and falls to earth, lies broken-
backed and lidless in the scree.
Acetylene torches now snug
in their holsters, shop-vacs
trundled back behind the dawn.
A mist becomes a murmur, becomes
a moan deepening the dust-
choked fissures in the rock O pity us
Ignatz O come to us by moonlight
O arch your speckled body over the earth.
~~~
The thunderstorm came like a pot boiling over and the color
of water was made by that, all of a sudden, a pigment
more tropical than dense with the reflection of light.
Everywhere the scent of at least five different kinds of plants
lifted up. The desert can’t talk back but I believe
it breathes instead, breathes vivid when the water
wants it the water can’t wait and it breathes back.
I turned and went into the house.
Under the dining room table, a snake.
Green with a yellow stripe bisecting its back.
Motion ate each centimeter of floor
and air, scared, it makes sense to say, though there
exists or existed no safer time ever in which that shape
wouldn’t want to move, dead August being the exception
to this when heat makes molasses of all of us.
Why did I want to chase it out? I did, I got a rake and kept
making it make that beautiful scared
shape upon the floor, so clean.
Like two ice cubes rubbing each other
and too cold to melt. Nothing organized that fear.
Seeing the edges it found its way out.
~~~
Everything is made of everything.
— Leonardo da Vinci



I found Rome in the woods.
Fair to admit it’s mostly
tundra to the west in the park, past Toklat
the Denali I revised, low grasslands
engineered to freeze deep
by October — this being Alaska — the great
            Tabularium close to the Temple of
            Castor and Pollux I rebuilt that same summer — 
            not superimposed, exact as any scheme
in secret — the Arch of Septimius Severus at the gravel bar
        where fox drank from a river turned stream,
           a Theater of Marcellus near
               the ranger station where one raven,
                                                                                    such a brat,
   complained of
                      my Circus Maximus, Trajan’s Column,
                              my Baths of Diocletian,
too many spots
soaked in unpronounceable Latin.
                    I really did, I shouldered bits of it,
      a ruin-hushed haunted business, my brain
                                                         a truck bed, a lift,
pulleys big as a whale’s heart,
expletives of cheap wonder all over
                                                                  my woodlot
and expanse.
                          One self-anoints to embellish
day, years, life thus far, and think oneself so ...    
                       Then busted — 
by a raven!
Well, that’s memory for you, that’s so-called
        civilization for you, to layer up,
                         to redo the already done.
I mean it’s a fact, the puny life span we’re allotted.
              And proof — Denali in August, fireweed,
spunky scrawny first Latinate — Erechtites hieracifolia — 
               giving off flowers to mark
               what weeks left, little
               time bomber, time traveler, ancient
               slips red-flagging the countdown to winter
               by climbing its own stalk.
Something perverse about that.
Something perfectly fiendishly self-conscious about that.
 
 • 
From the start perverse, any premise.
      Ask ... We can’t know. To be compelled
            makes an occasion. Rome’s grand
     past horrific, fire and ash, swamp into bog, lust
              and bloodlust — 
The Alaska Range dreams lurid as Rome,
                                        the worst
way below being fire, summer snow at night
      off the highest peaks by noon
              as distant from our cabin as the size
of a hand if I
                         held up the one with
                         an eye in the middle
to know how this works. Some have the power to
raise from the dead a before, before
scary and beautiful
           back to mystery cults, in caves, rubble
far under a Roman street, the altar to
Mithras still slaying his bull, crumbling the stonework.             All things being equal. But they’re not.
                    Agony, it’s older.
                      Ask the moose at Denali,
                         the snowshoe hare, the lynx,
such a wily courtly lot.
                                           Ask Ovid
      banished to his hovel on the Black Sea, aching
                for Rome’s exalted rude cacophony, each
      exiled month a big thick X down                                   Februarius,                                 Aprilis to home-shattered sick enough
for an undersong.
Look it up! Undersong: a strain; a droning;
the burden of a song — 
~~~
The clockwork saguaros sprout extra faces like planaria stroked by
               a razor. Chug
say the sparrows, emitting fluffs of steam. Chug chug say the piston-powered
               ground squirrels.
The tumbleweeds circle on retrofitted tracks, but the blue pasteboard welkin
               is much dented by little winds.
The yuccas pulse softly under the grow-light sconces.
Here is the door he will paint on the rock.
Here is the glass floor of the cliff.
He’ll enter from the west, backlit in orange isinglass, pyrite
            pendants glinting from the fringes of his voice.
~~~
This prairie holds us
with its plainness.
An ugly wife.
We would not stay but children comfort us
and we need this flatness.
On our table
a carp with a tumor
on its lip,
larva eating its side.
An old man laughs,
one silver tooth
in his head
like a galvanized
watertank.
We are driven back
into the land,
our raccoon faces
banded around the eyes
with motorcycle goggles.
Every car we had
rusting in the yard.
We saddle the buffalo
and say we are captives.
This barrenness holds
us down like a wife.
~~~
1. The Winter: 1748
—Erasmus Darwin, 1731-1802
~~~
What seemed a mystery was
in fact a choice. Insert bird for sorrow.   
What seemed a memory was in fact
a dividing line. Insert bird for wind.   
Insert wind for departure when everyone is
standing still. Insert three mountains
burning and in three valleys a signal seer
seeing a distant light and a signal bearer
sprinting to a far-off bell. What seemed
a promise was in fact a sigh.   
What seemed a hot wind, a not quite enough,   
a forgive me, it has flown away, is in fact.   
In the meantime we paint the floors
red. We stroke the sound of certain names
into a fine floss that drifts across our teeth.
We stay in the room we share and listen
all night to what drifts through the window—
dog growl, owl call, a fleet of mosquitoes
setting sail, and down the road,   
the swish of tomorrow’s donkey-threshed grain.
~~~
Do you know what whole fields are?They are fields with a dog and a moon.Do you know the answer — for the many?Except there would be vineyards.Meaning there would, as usual, be commerce.Money, and a game of sorts to play it.Meanwhile — Emma lost in the cover-crop.Top of her head bobbing through mustard-flower.It is, after all, still here — The real world, the outstretched earth,Rain, soil, copper for pennies.
~~~
In your extended absence, you permit me
use of earth, anticipating
some return on investment. I must report
failure in my assignment, principally
regarding the tomato plants.
I think I should not be encouraged to grow
tomatoes. Or, if I am, you should withhold
the heavy rains, the cold nights that come
so often here, while other regions get
twelve weeks of summer. All this
belongs to you: on the other hand,
I planted the seeds, I watched the first shoots
like wings tearing the soil, and it was my heart
broken by the blight, the black spot so quickly
multiplying in the rows. I doubt
you have a heart, in our understanding of
that term. You who do not discriminate
between the dead and the living, who are, in consequence,
immune to foreshadowing, you may not know
how much terror we bear, the spotted leaf,
the red leaves of the maple falling
even in August, in early darkness: I am responsible
for these vines.
~~~
Cuk Son is a story.
Tucson is a linguistic alternative.
The story is in the many languages
still heard in this place of
Black Mountains.
They are in the echo of lost, forgotten languages
heard here even before the people arrived.
The true story of this place
recalls people walking
deserts all their lives and
continuing today, if only
in their dreams.
The true story is ringing
in their footsteps in a
place so quiet, they can hear
their blood moving
through their veins.
Their stories give shape to the
mountains encircling this place.
Wa:k is the story of
water memories of this desert.
Citizens gravitate to Sabino Canyon.
The humming, buzzing, clicking of water life,
the miracle of desert streams
on smooth boulders.
Rocks, sediment older than life itself
serve as reminders.
It should be unnecessary for sticky notes
to remind us what a desert place is.
A place dependent on rains of summer,
light dusting of snow,
the rarity of dry beds as rebel rivers.
It is real desert people who lift their faces
upward with the first signs of moisture.
They know how to inhale properly.
Recognizing the aroma of creosote in the distance.
Relieved the cycle is beginning again.
These people are to be commended.
It is others who lament the heat of
a June day, simultaneously
finding pride on surviving
the heat—a dry heat.
These individuals should simply
be tolerated.
Opposed to those who move
from one air-conditioned environment
to another, never acknowledging the heat of summer.
Being grateful for November, when
temperatures drop below eighty,
complaining of the lack of seasons in the desert,
heading for mountains
to see colors—
these people—well, what can we say.
We must feel for the dogs of Tucson.
Who bark as if they belong to somebody and
who, before the rain, wish they were a color other than black.
~~~
The shelter of it carved, caved
Across the river, the park and the little Ferris wheel
       closed down
The great oaks emptying, russet, gusseted
the hovering slant light leaking from the outer edge
       of cloud bed
leads and shawls pulled forth
Thy synchrony of the lost elements recovered
the shivering water surfaces, planar unmeldings, remeldings,
       riverine alchemies, unlocketed selves
now the reemergence, the sun pouring global gold
       uptilted, gobleted, incanted
Am I not as God made me but stranger?
Made stranger still by what I have seen
at this hour of earth untended, unministered—
light caught up in the river’s grooved tread
That sun more like a mass grope out of emptiness
       and the black river weeds before it, torn and trained,
       rocketed and stark and stuck-to
The tall shadow of the willow grows forth
And the spare stems of the grasses and the rods of the mullein
And these are the stations of this river
The houses and the boats and the parked cars
The growing wedge the ducks make moving forward, the shape
       of the element there among the weeds that jut forward,
the mass of the willows growing deeper in green and sundering
The backfall of sun going downward
The surface of the river coming clear of its own admixture
The ducks moving over like slow planes in formation,
       barely seen needles hauling white threads,
       secretly heeding
The fish in my skin relinquishes
Will I know then what I have become?
The river darkens from its end of trees closing in
There is the sun and this deep depression
Exiting as viewed in this river
~~~
In the middle of rolling grasslands, away from lights,
a moonless night untethers its wild polka-dots,
the formations we can name competing for attention
in a twinkling and crowded sky-bowl.
Out from the corners, our eyes detect a maverick meteor,
a transient streak, and lying back toward midnight
on the heft of car hood, all conversation blunted,
we are at once unnerved and somehow restored.
Out here, a furrow of spring-fed river threads
through ranches in the tens of thousands of acres.
Like cattle, we are powerless, by instinct can see
why early people trembled and deliberated the heavens.
Off in the distance those cattle make themselves known,
a bird song moves singular across the horizon.
Not yet 2:00, and bits of comet dust, the Perseids,
startle and skim the atmosphere like skipping stones.
In the leaden dark, we are utterly alone. As I rub the ridges
on the back of your hand, our love for all things warm
and pulsing crescendos toward dawn: this timeless awe,
your breath floating with mine upward into the stars.
 
~~~
Where they will bury me
I don't know.
Many places might not be
sorry to store me.
The Midwest has right of origin.
Already it has welcomed my mother
to its flat sheets.
The English fens that bore me
have been close curiously often.
It seems I can't get away from
dampness and learning.
If I stay where I am
I could sleep in this educated earth.
But if they are kind, they'll burn me
and send me to Vermont.
I'd be an education for the trees
and would relish, really,
flaring into maple each October—
my scarlet letter to you.
Your stormy north is possible.
You will be there, engrossed in its peat.
It would be handy not
to have to cross the whole Atlantic
each time I wanted to
lift up the turf and slip in beside you.
~~~
We could paint semi-darkness in semi-darkness. And the ‘right lighting’ of a picture could be semi-darkness. 
                                                            Wittgenstein
                                                            from Remarks on Color



These islands lie off the west coast of Ireland

as if nothing matters.

The people have lived here for centuries

with only a thin covering of soil over the surface.

Great use is made of the seaweed,

the cattle swimming out.

 

The women here are justly famous.

They weave their own tweed

and make a type of belt called criss.

The heavy Atlantic seas,

the slip stitch.

The difficulty of the patterns

are never written down.

 

Most impressive and rich, the trellis pattern

and the rope, the tribute to the hardworking bee.

But sometimes their knitting shows mistakes,

with a true Irish touch of nothing

really matters, a careless nonchalance

of the crossing of their cables.

 

And note mistakes in the simple patterns:

forked lightning or cliff paths,

small fields fenced with stone,

the ups and downs of married life,

the mosses.

 

The openwork has a religious

significance or none.

Sometimes the clarity of the pattern is

lost through the use of

very fine wool.

 

Green from the mosses, brown

from the seaweed, grey and cream

color from the stones and pebbles:

many are distinctly over-bobbled.

No matter. They are too lovely

to be lost. Wool and knitting

leaflets can be obtained.

 

In no case is the whole pattern given.

There are certain gaps and yawns

and part of the pattern is left out

as if it doesn’t matter,

or was too lovely,

so was lost.

 

Some of the simple patterns

are charming for children’s jerseys.

This one, for example,

would be lovely on a child.
~~~
First all belief is paradise. So pliable a medium. A time not very long. A transparency caused. A conveyance of rupture. A subtle transport. Scant and rare. Deep in the opulent morning, blissful regions, hard and slender. Scarce and scant. Quotidian and temperate. Begin afresh in the realms of the atmosphere, that encompasses the solid earth, the terraqueous globe that soars and sings, elevated and flimsy. Bright and hot. Flesh and hue. Our skies are inventions, durations, discoveries, quotas, forgeries, fine and grand. Fine and grand. Fresh and bright. Heavenly and bright. The day pours out space, a light red roominess, bright and fresh. Bright and oft. Bright and fresh. Sparkling and wet. Clamour and tint. We range the spacious fields, a battlement trick and fast. Bright and silver. Ribbons and failings. To and fro. Fine and grand. The sky is complicated and flawed and we’re up there in it, floating near the apricot frill, the bias swoop, near the sullen bloated part that dissolves to silver the next instant bronze but nothing that meaningful, a breach of greeny-blue, a syllable, we’re all across the swathe of fleece laid out, the fraying rope, the copper beech behind the aluminum catalpa that has saved the entire spring for this flight, the tops of these a part of the sky, the light wind flipping up the white undersides of leaves, heaven afresh, the brushed part behind, the tumbling. So to the heavenly rustling. Just stiff with ambition we range the spacious trees in earnest desire sure and dear. Brisk and west. Streaky and massed. Changing and appearing. First and last. This was made from Europe, formed from Europe, rant and roar. Fine and grand. Fresh and bright. Crested and turbid. Silver and bright. This was spoken as it came to us, to celebrate and tint, distinct and designed. Sure and dear. Fully designed. Dear afresh. So free to the showing. What we praise we believe, we fully believe. Very fine. Belief thin and pure and clear to the title. Very beautiful. Belief lovely and elegant and fair for the footing. Very brisk. Belief lively and quick and strong by the bursting. Very bright. Belief clear and witty and famous in impulse. Very stormy. Belief violent and open and raging from privation. Very fine. Belief intransigent after pursuit. Very hot. Belief lustful and eager and curious before beauty.Very bright. Belief intending afresh. So calmly and clearly. Just stiff with leaf sure and dear and appearing and last. With lust clear and scarce and appearing and last and afresh.
~~~
There is a chair

the heart of which

is wooden

split five ways

and grass pressed flat

where we kissed

where others later kissed

on the same mattress

and solemn nothing

happening under a canopy—

 

Have you forgotten me?

 

I will go down wonderfully

as was told in proverbs

though for a long time I thought

I should not go.

 

Here are things that have

no Latin names

or none

that men would know.
~~~
One against the other across
the fleetingly infinite field:
that dry crackling of pallid
corn stalks clacking comes close to it.
behind them mountains range like steppes
between the tiers of fog they coddle.
it's autumn coming close
again and you need to compare
this one to autumns past, recall the other
sputters of color too good to last.
something you need to say, something
you come close to:
wind in its limitless visits—
especially in fall when it cleans
the overblown trees—
wind in possession of you
says it best. but you go on anyway,
trying to pen the breeze:
this fall phenomenon different
from summer's in its macabre
celebration of the lifeless,
in its forever rewritten memory
of what comes next. sorrel
leaves swirling in a whirlwind
mimic your own compulsive
repetition, its own circle
of yearning so close
to a kind of comfort.
quickening conversations
of geese flocking south
chill through your thin skin:
behind it a choir of silence
undefined rows you
closer to what you'll never forget,
what you almost remember
this time. closer to its name.
the heart overtaken. the bare staves
waving at boughs' ends, the musical
red wings: something
they almost say, more like a sense
hunched in darkness, an ache,
a suspicion: every time,
closer to it, closer. hear
hard light on the hillside
flatten the visible scale
into two dimensions, and you're in love
with the flatted third:
the way it breaks you down,
over and over, to mean you are
alive. the way you rub it in
the wound that you never
come close to wanting to close—
as if you could scrub away the whirling
of everything else and come down
like snow to the center, the eye, so close
to the purity of knowing inside this
present pain, that searing
white place without wind or words.
~~~
One will live to see the Caterpillar rut everything
they walk on—seacliff buckwheat cleared, relentless
ice plant to replace it, the wild fields bisected
by the scenic highway, canyons covered with cul-de-sacs,
gas stations, comfortable homes, the whole habitat
along this coastal stretch endangered, everything,
everyone, everywhere in it danger as well—
but now they're logging the one stilling hawk
Smith sights, the conspiring grasses' shh shhhh ssh,
the coreopsis Mattoni's boot barely spares,
and, netted, a solitary blue butterfly. Smith
ahead of him chasing the stream, Mattoni wonders
if he plans to swim again. Just like that
the spell breaks. It's years later, Mattoni lecturing
on his struggling butterfly. How fragile.
  
           • 
If his daughter spooled out the fabric
she's chosen for her wedding gown,
raw taffeta, burled, a bright hued tan,
perhaps Mattoni would remember
how those dunes looked from a distance,
the fabric, balanced between her arms,
making valleys in the valley, the fan
above her mimicking the breeze.
He and his friend loved everything
softly undulating under the coyest wind,
and the rough truth as they walked
through the land's scratch and scrabble
and no one was there, then, besides Mattoni
and his friend, walking along Dolan's Creek,
in that part of California they hated
to share. The ocean, a mile or so off,
anything but passive so that even there,
in the canyon, they sometimes heard it smack
and pull well-braced rocks. The breeze,
basic: salty, bitter, sour, sweet. Smith trying
to identify the scent, tearing leaves
of manzanita, yelling: "This is it. Here! This is it!"
his hand to his nose, his eyes, having finally seen
the source of his pleasure, alive.
               •
In the lab, after the accident, he remembered it,
the butterfly. How good a swimmer Smith had been,
how rough the currents there at Half Moon Bay, his friend
alone with reel and rod—Mattoni back at school
early that year, his summer finished too soon—
then all of them together in the sneaker wave,
and before that the ridge, congregations of pinking
blossoms, and one of them bowing, scaring up the living,
the frail and flighty beast too beautiful
to never be pinned, those nights Mattoni worked
without his friend, he remembered too.
He called the butterfly Smith's Blue.
 
~~~
Someone else’s child, not you, is running and running
down the beach. Both feet dig into the burning sand.
Two others heave one yellow bucket full of sugar-brown
 seaweed, their twin suits flowering 
a conflation of pink over blue behind the water. So
landmark cactus and landmine rock battlefield uphill toward
the early moon’s white horse head and each wave collapses to your
right, unsettles, shouting every half minute: have me, shhhh,
have me, shhhh, halve me, shhhh 
~~~
The country lies flat, expressionless as the face of a stranger.   
Not one hillock shelters a buried bone. The city:
a scene thin as a theater backdrop, where no doors open,   
no streets extend beyond the view from the corner.
Only the railroad embankment is high, shaggy with grass.   
Only the freight, knuckling a red sun under its wheels,   
drags familiar box-car shapes down long perspectives   
of childhood meals and all crossings at sunset.
With a look deep as the continent, with the casual greeting   
of those who will meet again, it bestrides the viaduct.   
Its span is the span of trestles above mountain gorges,   
its roar the echo of streams still wearing away stone.
~~~
Since it’s just me here I’ve
found the back and stayed
there most of the time, in
rain and snow and the
no-moon nights, dodging the front
I used to put up like a yard
gussied and groomed, all
edged and flower-lined, my
bottled life.
Uncorked, I had a thought: I
want the want
I dreamed of wanting once, a
quarter cup of sneak-peek
at what prowls in the back, at
what sings in the
wet rag space behind the garage, back
where the rabbits nest, where
I smell something soupish, sour and dank and it’s
filled with weeds like rough
cat tongues and
the wind is unfostered, untended,
now that it’s just me here and
I am so hungry
for the song that grows tall like a weed
grows, and grows.
When I was a
little girl
my ma said a woman gets
tired and sick
of the front yard, of
kissing the backside of a
rose.
~~~
Sweet poet of the woods, a long adieu!    Farewell soft mistrel of the early year! Ah! ’twill be long ere thou shalt sing anew,    And pour thy music on the night’s dull ear. Whether on spring thy wandering flights await,    Or whether silent in our groves you dwell, The pensive muse shall own thee for her mate,    And still protect the song she loves so well. With cautious step the love-lorn youth shall glide    Through the lone brake that shades thy mossy nest; And shepherd girls from eyes profane shall hide    The gentle bird who sings of pity best: For still thy voice shall soft affections move, And still be dear to sorrow and to love!
~~~
At dusk, the grandmother sits alone in the light of the long pale pool and speaks to the frog who is waiting by the electric gate of the clubhouse. It will be all right, she says, leaning out from her chair. Her voice is churning, and old, and wet with advice. Her newly red hair purples under the bug light. It will be all right, she says, again, and again the sky rolls in and out on its journey across the peninsula, rattling the palms.
~~~
I saw then the white-eyed man
leaning in to see if I was ready
yet to go where he has been waiting
to take me. I saw then the gnawing
sounds my faith has been making
and I saw too that the shape it sings
in is the color of cast-iron mountains
I drove so long to find I forgot I had
been looking for them, for the you
I once knew and the you that was born
waiting for me to find you. I have been
twisting and turning across these lifetimes
where forgetting me is what you do
so you don’t have to look at yourself. I saw
that I would drown in a creek carved out
of a field our incarnations forged the first path
through to those mountains. I invited you to stroll
with me there again for the first time, to pause
and sprawl in the grass while I read to you
the poem you hadn’t known you’d been waiting
to hear. I read until you finally slept
and all your jagged syntaxes softened into rest.
You’re always driving so far from me towards
the me I worry, without you, is eternity. I lay there,
awake, keeping watch while you snored.
I waited, as I always seem to, for you
to wake up and come back to me.
~~~
Invisible fish swim this ghost ocean now described by waves of sand, by water-worn rock. Soon the fish will learn to walk. Then humans will come ashore and paint dreams on the dying stone. Then later, much later, the ocean floor will be punctuated by Chevy trucks, carrying the dreamers’ decendants, who are going to the store.
~~~
you see so many
                 graveyards around
             these little towns—
                out in the open
                    spaces & places.
                          i guess big cities
                    have not enough space for the
                       living,
                             let alone the dead.
there is so much
water here
and back home in
chicago we would call
them rocks, lying all on the ground(s)
lots of rocks around/but
you would call them
stones here.
see how much smoother
the world is.
the farther east we
go
    the more frequent
are the stops at rich small
quaint towns and the more frequent
are the admonitions to “watch one’s
ticket on the rack above the seat
or to be very sure to take it with
you if you leave your seat!”
      apparently,
                      the very wealthy,
                                               steal.
as i ride the train
watching the many white students
eating out of brown paper
sacks, saving their now
money so that they can
be the very wealthy later
on, also.
~~~
We arrive eight hours before morning but the Sound luminesces enough to gloss jabbed brushstrokes of cedar, the strand prickled with fringes of eelgrass, and the world's baby teeth ground down to this pall of sand.   It's gusting so strong I can barely pee straight — You can see in each stunted and strung-out live oak the shape of the wind's hands. On this last stand before the Outer Banks Sharon makes camp while I pay twenty quarters to shelter stunned and out-of-context. Such bare slubs of land the memoir I'm reading calls griefscapes. The groove fits my tongue so for forty more pages I keep the light on, pulled by a man oaring his way through childhood to a stung and moondamp first place, all slap and vowel and grunt-pine punctuation, the no-way-satisfied   lessing & moring of the tideshore. I knew in advance of reason this freight of rain, salt in my hair. That child I was, what was she mourning before death charged his first fare? We wake and hurry to slip our moorings. The ferry's there.
~~~
The dog came back, grinning and smelling of carrion, and her husband behind it, stride and gestures too large for the house. His field voice, cracking, declared a wider kingdom, and the name of a fallen city, not theirs this time. From outside the roar and shrill of celebration poured in. He drew near in a rank cloud, breathing hard, to show her the gash in his thumb. So she washed in five waters and went to their bed, but he slept without moving, still in his cloak and dust.
~~~
I like to see it lap the Miles -
And lick the Valleys up - 
And stop to feed itself at Tanks - 
And then - prodigious step
Around a Pile of Mountains - 
And supercilious peer
In Shanties - by the sides of Roads - 
And then a Quarry pare
To fit its sides
And crawl between
Complaining all the while
In horrid - hooting stanza - 
Then chase itself down Hill - 
And neigh like Boanerges - 
Then - prompter than a Star
Stop - docile and omnipotent
At it's own stable door - 
~~~
The twist of the stream was inscrutable.  It was a seemingly run-of-the-mill  stream that flowed for several miles by the side  of Route 302 in northern Vermont—  and presumably does still—but I’ve not  been back there for what seems like a long time.  I have it in my mind’s eye, the way  one crested a rise and rounded a corner  on the narrow blacktop, going west, and saw  off to the left in the flat green meadow  the stream turning briefly back on itself  to form a perfect loop—a useless light-filled  water noose or fragment of moon’s cursive,  a sign or message of some kind—but left behind.
~~~
The sky was laced with Irish cream mist, that mellow tan overhanging the hills, which were studded with deathmasks and baskets spilling flowers from both ends. We scanned the haze for lightning. They were studded with earthworks and iron forks inserted between leaves of grass, jacks and bearings and balances, sinuous fingers of pink marble and synovial joints in bronze. But if we got struck by lightning—not a lot; say glanced, or shaved, there was a chance (we heard) it wouldn't be so bad: a little refreshing, a little like La Vita Nuova in a readable translation. "In a flash," as they say, we could acquire a self-renewing subscription to classical music (it's always classical in the scientific literature) accessible at all hours and piped into the forebrain from the hypothalamus. This space available for celebrations. Someone visits for the first time and says, "Oh, let's get married here" and guests drive in and eye the hors d'oeuvre tent before finding a folding chair. But it isn't long before the mirroring going on between, for instance, the sculptures and  the trees—the trees looking more like sculptures, the sculptures getting seasoned, growing bark (patinas) even—it isn't long before it hypnotizes the guests. Who would wear a wedding dress in such a charged atmosphere, having heard that ghost story of the wedding dress with the power to possess the soul of the bride? Actually it was a horror flick from somewhere, Tokyo or Calcutta . . . It was a wedding dress that took possession of the soul of its bride the minute she saw it in the mirror, or it saw itself—and this we know happens, but not with the malevolence of this dress that wreaked havoc at the reception, set the hall on fire and dropped a crate of champagne on the string trio. "Aha," cries the groom as he realizes the chrysalis of evil he must divide from his bride: "You are hardly an unruffled surface!" No you would not want to wear that dress amid the wireless network of gigantic sculptures and their wind-scraped murmuring. When the wind stirs, is it not the gardeners? The gardeners are invisible, they don't garden during business hours. As you'd put a dye in the air in order to see it, a bird sucked through its drafts advertises the invisible and upgrades it to naked.
~~~
The t(rain)
again this morning, sky always gray,
grain cars f(lying)
like blackbirds with fieldseed
in their bellies.
The eight o five carrying
g(rain)
sings like tribes
when they migrated north in summer
across the plains
following tracks of herds.
High water into trees.
The lake full of rain.
We say it is someone else
pushing down on the lake
to make it spill over its edge.
While we wait
the woman earth sings with the tribes,
transforms herself
into all things.
After the train
b(rush) burning, the delay of smoke
in the car comes after
we have passed like sound.
Rain hangs fringe from earth woman’s dress.
She holds the delay of truth
until it comes from our mouths.
Coyotes sleep on her lap,
birds fly into the b(ranches) of her hair
while farther down the road
the black snake train wiggles behind her ear.
~~~
White horses, tails high, rise from the cedar.
Smoke brings the fat crickets,
trembling breeze.
Find that holy place, a promise.
Embers glow like moon air.
I call you back from the grasses.
Wake me when sand pipers
fly. They fade,
and new sounds flutter. Cattails at sunrise.
Hair matted by sleep.
Sun on the meadow. Grey boughs lie tangled.
The ground I was born to
wants me to leave.
I’ve searched everywhere to tell you
my eyes are with the hazels.
Wind swells through fences, drones a flat ache for hours.
At night, music would echo
from your womanless bedroom.
Far down those bleaching cliffs,
roses shed a torrent.
Will you brush my ear? An ice bear sometimes lumbers west.
Your life still gleams, the edge melting.
I never let you know.
You showed me and how under snow and darkness,
the grasses breathe for miles.
 
~~~
When with the skin you do acknowledge drought,
The dry in the voice, the lightness of feet, the fine
Flake of the heat at every level line;
When with the hand you learn to touch without
Surprise the spine for the leaf, the prickled petal,
The stone scorched in the shine, and the wood brittle;
Then where the pipe drips and the fronds sprout
And the foot-square forest of clover blooms in sand,
You will lean and watch, but never touch with your hand.September 1934
~~~
O slow.
O so low solo.
Indigo lasso.
Pell-mell
the palomino
snow falls
in a disheveled
manner.
~~~
There, in that lost
       corner of the ordnance survey.
Drive through the vanity —
       two pubs and a garage — of Satley,
then right, cross the A68
       past down-at-heel farms and a quarry,
you can't miss it, a 'T' instead of a 'plus'
       where the road meets a wall.
If it's a usual day
       there'll be freezing wind, and you'll
stumble climbing the stile
       (a ladder, really) as you pull
your hat down and zip up your jacket.
       Out on the moor,
thin air may be strong enough to   
       knock you over,
but if you head into it
       downhill, you can shelter
in the wide, cindery trench of an old
       leadmine-to-Consett railway.
You may have to share it
       with a crowd of dirty
supercilious-looking ewes, who will baaa
       and cut jerkily away
after posting you blank stares
       from their foreign eyes.
One winter we came across five
       steaming, icicle-hung cows.
But in summer, when the heather's full of nests,
       you'll hear curlews
following you, raking your memory, maybe,
       with their cries;
or, right under you nose,
       a grouse will whirr up surprised,
like a poet startled by a line
       when it comes to her sideways.
No protection is offered by trees —
       Hawthorn the English call May,
a few struggling birches.
       But of wagtails and yellowhammers, plenty,
and peewits who never say peewit,
       more a minor, go'way, go'way.
Who was he, Salter? Why was this his gate?
       A pedlars' way, they carried
salt to meat. The place gives tang to
       survival, its unstoppable view,
a reservoir, ruins of the lead mines, new
       forestry pushing from the right, the curlew.
~~~
I made a sand castle.
In rolled the sea.
            "All sand castles
            belong to me—
            to me,"
said the sea.
I dug sand tunnels.
In flowed the sea.
            "All sand tunnels
            belong to me—
            to me,"
said the sea.
I saw my sand pail floating free.
I ran and snatched it from the sea.
            "My sand pail
            belongs to me—
            to ME!"
~~~
for Cosetta



Once there were coyotes, cardinals
in the cedar. You could cure amnesia
with the trees of our back-forty. Once
I drowned in a monsoon of frogs—
Grandma said it was a good thing, a promise
for a good crop. Grandma’s perfect tomatoes.
Squash. She taught us to shuck corn, laughing,
never spoke about her childhood
or the faces in gingerbread tins
stacked in the closet.
She was covered in a quilt, the Creek way.
But I don’t know this kind of burial:
vanishing toads, thinning pecan groves,
peach trees choked by palms.
New neighbors tossing clipped grass
over our fence line, griping to the city
of our overgrown fields.
Grandma fell in love with a truck driver,
grew watermelons by the pond
on our Indian allotment,
took us fishing for dragonflies.
When the bulldozers came
with their documents from the city
and a truckload of pipelines,
her shotgun was already loaded.
Under the bent chestnut, the well
where Cosetta’s husband
hid his whiskey—buried beneath roots
her bundle of beads. They tell
the story of our family. 
~~~
At supper time an ondine’s narrow feet
made dark tracks on the hearth.
Like the heart of a yellow fruit was the fire’s heat,
but they rubbed together quite blue with the cold.
The sandy hem of her skirt dripped on the floor.
She sat there with a silvered cedar knot
for a low stool; and I sat opposite,
my lips and eyelids hot
in the heat of the fire. Piling on dry bark,
seeing that no steam went up from her dark dress,
I felt uneasiness
as though firm sand had shifted under my feet
in the wash of a wave.
I brought her soup from the stove and she would not eat,
but sat there crying her cold tears,
her blue lips quivering with cold and grief.
She blamed me for a thief,
saying that I had burned a piece of wood
the tide washed up. And I said, No,
the tide had washed it out again; and even so,
a piece of sodden wood was not so rare
as polished agate stones or ambergris.
She stood and wrung her hair
so that the water made a sudden splash
on the round rug by the door. I saw her go
across the little footbridge to the beach.
After, I threw the knot on the hot coals.
It fell apart and burned with a white flash,
a crackling roar in the chimney and dark smoke.
I beat it out with a poker
in the soft ash.
Now I am frightened on the shore at night,
and all the phosphorescent swells that rise
come towards me with the threat of her dark eyes
with a cold firelight in them;
and crooked driftwood writhes
in dry sand when I pass.
Should she return and bring her sisters with her,
the withdrawing tide
would leave a long pool in my bed.
There would be nothing more of me this side
the melting foamline of the latest wave.
~~~
White hail pelting the frozen bog,I’m stuck in the first line of January,following my host’s dogon his walk through the stone century,around the quarry, slices of marble and mud,past a herd of miners exhaling smoke,past a barn smelling of merde,and back to where I’m stuck and broke.The fucking dog barks at the night,mad at the stars all his life and then again.I rethink kicking him out,but being cool, I let him in.
~~~
It was winter, near freezing,
I'd walked through a forest of firs
when I saw issue out of the waterfall
a solitary bird.
It lit on a damp rock,
and, as water swept stupidly on,
wrung from its own throat
supple, undammable song.
It isn't mine to give.
I can't coax this bird to my hand
that knows the depth of the river
yet sings of it on land.
~~~
Summer-long the gulls’ old umbra cry
unraveled ease
but certain waves went by, then by.
The sky shook out the days.
The seabirds’ hunger rose in rings,
flung rock-clams to their shatterings,
raked gullets full, the bone-bills scraped.
High noon: oceans of time escaped.
                             *
All winter we slept benched together,
breakers, sleepdrunk children in a car
not conscious where they go.
We kneaded bread, kept out the weather,
while old suspicions huddled by the door,
mice in the snow.
                             *
In spring, the leaving bloomed—
oak leaf unfurled, a foot, resplendent
vigorous, aching to shake loose
but still dependent.
One morning moongreen loaves
rose into bones that rose to lift
our skin like sleeves,
our time together’s revenant.
                             *
Perennial fall, come cool the cliffs,
bring quiet, sulfur, early dark.
Represent as you must: dusk, dying, ends
and row us into winter’s water:
The body, wind-whipped, forms stiff peaks,
ice settles in the marrow bone.
At the chest, the live stone breaks against the beak,
beak breaks against stone.
  
~~~
They think she lives alone
on the edge of town in a two-room house
where she moved when her husband died
at thirty-five of a gunshot wound
in the bed of another woman. The curandera
and house have aged together to the rhythm
of the desert.
She wakes early, lights candles before
her sacred statues, brews tea of yerbabuena.
She moves down her porch steps, rubs
cool morning sand into her hands, into her arms.
Like a large black bird, she feeds on
the desert, gathering herbs for her basket.
Her days are slow, days of grinding
dried snake into powder, of crushing
wild bees to mix with white wine.
And the townspeople come, hoping
to be touched by her ointments,
her hands, her prayers, her eyes.
She listens to their stories, and she listens
to the desert, always, to the desert.
By sunset she is tired. The wind
strokes the strands of long gray hair,
the smell of drying plants drifts
into her blood, the sun seeps
into her bones. She dozes
on her back porch. Rocking, rocking.
~~~
The baby sleeps.Sunlight plays upon my lap, through doily leaves a black lab comes,a scotty goes, the day wears on, the baby wakes.The good birds sing,invisible or seldom seen, in hidden kingdoms, grateful for the in-between. The baby sleeps. Elsewhere the Queen rolls byon gusts of cheer — ladies wave and bless her reign. The baby frets. The baby feeds.The end of lunch, a daytime moon. The leavesare lightly tinkered with.It’s spring? No, autumn? Afternoon? We’ve sat so long, we’ve walkedso far. The woods in shade, the woods in sun, the singing birds,the noble trees.The child is grown. The child is gone. The black lab comes,his circuit done. His mistress coils his scarlet lead.
~~~
(In memory of Joseph Mary Plunkett)
("Romantic Ireland's dead and gone,It's with O'Leary in the grave.")
~~~
I
I’ve felt undeserving. I’ve made myself ill with the glory,
in the unleavened garden
disgorged the lies and scared away with a stick a snake.
What made me cover that which I could not have?
I’ve grieved and walked in catacombs,
I’ve felt undeserving. I’ve made myself ill with the glory.
Even the falling leaves gesture their renunciation.
I disgorge the lies and abhor the serpent’s hiss.
I remember seasons, things I bring from far away,
and grieve. I walk in catacombs.
In gardens now, by the stone walls, sunlight closes,
the falling leaves gesture their renunciation.
I remember being in a field touching a man’s body.
I remember seasons, things I bring from far away
and things that hold their breath for shame.
His skin was soft as a girl’s and he closed his eyes.
I placed apple petals on his eyelids;
we were lying in a field and I touched his body.
Then there were clouds, an uncanny silence,
as when in a green place the air holds its breath for shame.
What made me covet what I could not have?
Ill with the power and glory, a thrashing in my chest,
I remember the unleavened gardens,
petals falling singly, the yellow snake disgorging lies.
II
I’ve grieved and walked in catacombs.
I’ve felt undeserving. I’ve made myself ill with the glory,
power and glory--
a thrashing in my rib cage.
I’ve gone into the unleavened spring garden,
disgorged the lies,
and scared away with a stick a snake.
I’ve grieved and walked in catacombs.
What made me cover that which I could not have?
I’ve felt undeserving. In this bright land
that changes from yellow to green and back to yellow,
I remember seasons, things I bring with me from far away
and things that hold their breath as if for shame.
I’ve made myself ill with the power and glory.
I’ve gone into the unleavened garden
and startled a yellow snake
disgorging lies. A thrashing in my rib cage.
What made me cover what I could not have?
I remember   seasons. Things that hold their breath for shame.
Things I bring with me from far away.
III
I’ve made myself ill with the power and glory.
I’ve made myself ill with the power and glory.
~~~
 
                           There’s a shadow over the city               the light, as usual, framing and erasing
 
Just say you
dream fires each
night smoothing each
collapsing page from
 
the throat talking
in a series
of measures in
the high desert
 
the perfect life
in a series
of measured gestures
an invitation to
 
see the world
from a bridge
that burns in
the next night
~~~
Out of a high meadow where flowers
bloom above cloud, come down;
pursue me with reasons for smiling without malice.
Bring mimic pride like that of the seedling fir,
surprise in the perfect leg-stems
and queries unstirred by recognition or fear
pooled in the deep eyes.
Come down by regions where rocks
lift through the hot haze of pain;
down landscapes darkened, crossed
by the rift of death-shock; place print
of a neat hoof on trampled ground
where not one leaf or root
remains unbitten; but come down
always, accompany me to the morass
of the decaying mind. There
we’ll share one rotted stump between us.
~~~
for Nathaniel, 1900—1968



All afternoon you worked at cutting them down.
Branch after branch tossed
into the heap. You had your ceremony. Old pants. The pipe.
The pipe rested in the cleft of the tree.
When the pile got big enough, you threw the kerosene.
Now the woods are clouded again. You forgot
the world could be this messy.
Air thickens into leaves, the leaves into worms.
Behind the barn, overnight, it seems,
tents have spread out in the apple trees.
There’s work for you. So you come back
in your pants old as dirt. With a pipe heavy as stone.
No time to lose. Whatever is rotten,
whatever won’t hold the weight of another season,
you hack down. There’s one moment, though,
when you feel almost sorry for them.
The tents break into flame and the small, black
pieces of anguish crawl
out into the grass. Those that get away, well,
you let them get away this time.
~~~
1
No one felt in the dark for his hat.
No one budged an inch.
Thus the story draws to its end.
No one felt over the edge
of her silk pocket to touch her parking ticket.
No one even wished to
walk out of the dark to the street.2
Over the transparent page I traced my name.
I thought about The Bird That Turns Around,
How To Blow A Brick Over, What To Do
While Waiting For The Doctor, Answers To
Problems On Page 2,000, The Chair That
Comes To You, The Mysterious Paper Purse,
The Universe Around Us, Lift To Erase.3
Those days everything I thought trembled
through the rotating blades of an electric fan.
The way my voice moved through it.
The way my fingers shook.
I wore a two-tiered hat.
A dead mule is huge.
The man with the stick was fat.4
A dead deer has the face of a rat.
Last night I watched seven white deer
walk single file across the black edge,
the levee’s border.
Slowly, each one looked me over,
saw I was sleeping, and soon came closer
to lick my face all over.5
All fall I played at being a slave.
In the red embers of fires I made
I burned slips of paper with politicians’ names
to pass the time.
I cooked rich soups of dragonflies.
I learned to aim an arrow
through a devilhorse’s brain.6
I sat alone by the water.
They trusted me with the river.
When United Fruit Company boats
headed for port, upriver,
I called out to sailors,
down came stalks of bananas
to snag and bring up to the batture.7
When the polls opened until the polls closed
two men dangled their rifles over their shoulders
and pretended they couldn’t be seen.
The men and women who came were embarrassed.
They looked down at the white glare
of crushed shells at their feet.
They looked off into the distance.8
In the hot sun on the wooden platform
I stood waiting for the icehouse doors to open.
I wanted to be asked inside
the cool bricks of smoking water, frozen
and squared in fifty-pound blocks,
rattling along belts of silver rollers.
I wanted to be cool and dry.9
The women were left locked in the house.
The rifle’s blue-black barrel shone
in the corner against the white, white wall.
Somewhere in the swamps around us
a man threw himself against the dark.
I couldn’t understand why our lights were on.
I wondered if he would drown.10
I was afraid of the iridescent algae pool,
hit with glaze after an afternoon storm,
lifted like a giant keyhole,
lit by the great green eyeball behind it,
watching me, watching me turn away,
watching me look back, watching me, for all I knew,
catch my breath, not wanting to give it back.11
We walked into the parking lot
after 10 o’clock mass on Sunday.
A car’s blur crossed our path
so close I felt the heat of the sun
in the hot wind off its fender.
They only meant to scare us.
I felt then what my prayers might have been.12
That afternoon someone decided to slaughter the   
                                                                   rabbits.
They held the scruffs of their necks,
whacked their soft brown crowns
with cracked baseball bats.
Each one bled through the nose.
We fed their guts to the alligator
by the shed in the deep, deep hole.13
I watched them kissing, kissing in sorrow,
in the sitting rooms in the funeral parlor.
They were drinking cafe au lait
and eating ham sandwiches.
Yes, there were so many flowers.
I didn’t want to be kissed in sorrow.
I didn’t want to be patted or pitied.14
The squeak and thump and mist of flit
as someone pumped sprays of insecticide.
It fell over my face, like a blessing,
like a tingling sensation in my fingers,
like a thousand evaporating lessons,
it fell on the oil lamp’s wick.
The flame danced. It wobbled, dipped and brightened.
~~~
He was touched or he touched or   she did and was, or they were   and would. Or the room could, its   three doors, two windows or   the house on a slant touching,   touched by the drift down street, cars   pressing quick or slowing. All along   the town touched a river, the river   the filth falling through it. What was clean—   a source pure as rumor—a shore   touching lake touched by wind above,   and below, a spring. All touch blindly further water. That blue touching   blacker regions in the sea so weirdly   solitary, each to under, to every   sideways past deeper, where nowhere.
~~~
Untitled, from the Silueta series, 1980, by Ana Mendieta 
has appeared to the mountain
dwellers, her grief  engraved 
where stone softens to clay. Keep
your eyes sharp for a dagger. 
In its hilt, you’ll find her face
pressed to the earth’s cheek. Kiss 
this sacred spot before the rains
wash it away like her orphaned 
feet. Notched heart cradles
a planet heavy with night- 
mares flying into empty mouths.
Listen for their thirsty murmurs. 
She’ll push her ponderous child
into the dew of  a San Felipe dawn, 
name him Salvador. They’ll rest
beneath a web spun umbilical, 
eclipsed from our human eyes.
 
• 
Our Lady
 
stone             clay 
 
earth rain orphaned heart 
eclipsed
 
~~~
Below the gardens and the darkening pines
The living water sinks among the stones,
Sinking yet foaming till the snowy tones
Merge with the fog drawn landward in dim lines.
The cloud dissolves among the flowering vines,
And now the definite mountain-side disowns
The fluid world, the immeasurable zones.
Then white oblivion swallows all designs.
But still the rich confusion of the sea,
Unceasing voice, sombre and solacing,
Rises through veils of silence past the trees;
In restless repetition bound, yet free,
Wave after wave in deluge fresh releasing
An ancient speech, hushed in tremendous ease.
~~~
O, she says (because she loves to say O),
~~~
Pale, then enkindled,
light
advancing,
emblazoning
summits of palm and pine,
the dew
lingering,
scripture of
scintillas.
Soon the roar
of mowers
cropping the already short
grass of lawns,
men with long-nozzled
cylinders of pesticide
poking at weeds,
at moss in cracks of cement,
and louder roar
of helicopters off to spray
vineyards where braceros try
to hold their breath,
and in the distance, bulldozers, excavators,
babel of destructive construction.
Banded by deep
oakshadow, airy
shadow of eucalyptus,
miner’s lettuce,
tender, untasted,
and other grass, unmown,
luxuriant,
no green more brilliant.
Fragile paradise.
         .   .   .   .
At day’s end the whole sky,
vast, unstinting, flooded with transparent
mauve,
tint of wisteria,
cloudless
over the malls, the industrial parks,
the homes with the lights going on,
the homeless arranging their bundles.
         .   .   .   .
Who can utter
the poignance of all that is constantly
threatened, invaded, expended
and constantly
nevertheless
persists in beauty,
tranquil as this young moon
just risen and slowly
drinking light   
from the vanished sun.
Who can utter
the praise of such generosity
or the shame?
~~~
saw the magnet grow electric
                                               and the fixed points
become a field in rural Denmark
                                                    as the needle moved through various materials
all the while remaining parallel:
                                                 the usual: silver, zinc, lead, etc.
and then tried needles of glass
                                               needles of shellac
                                                                            with all the west above
while below, the east in winding spirals
                                                             traveling three years across Europe,
a good friend of Hans Christian Andersen
                                                                    and of aluminum, whose name points
to its invisible lights
                                within
                                            whose forces crossed and became
his galvanic opus, The Soul in Nature,
                                                          as well as various Italian newspapers — 
to eventually end up as a park in Copenhagen
                                                                       dominated by green, a lake, and shade
in which a woman dressed in green sits reading to this day.
~~~
Distrust this season breedsin me wholeblue worlds, am secondto leafy nouns,pinned back darkening lipof the night,untrustworthy sidewalk glazedand sleeping there,peachy trees, a line drawn from onebrow of a star downand planted, each pillowlittle shimmer, little wilt startledfrom out the arranging fieldmoonlit pale behindno foxes, in me finding the fragrantnew crisis, not dead stillwhere I love you in feastand pledge, worlds rolling firston crookedlyand on.
~~~
What?
You don’t feel at home in your country,
almost overnight?
All the simple things
you cared about,
maybe took for granted. . .
you feel
insulted, invisible?
Almost as if you’re not there?
But you’re there.
Where before you mingled freely. . .
appreciated people who weren’t
just like you. . .
divisions grow stronger.
That’s what “chosen” and “unchosen” will do.
(Just keep your eyes on your houses and gardens.
Keep your eyes on that tree in bloom.)
Yes, a wall. Ours came later but. . .
who talks about how sad the land looks,
marked by a massive wall?
That’s not a normal shadow.
It’s something else looming over your lives.
 
~~~
No daylight for two months, an ice chisel sliversfrozen lake water refracting blue cinders.By light of an oil lamp, a child learns to savor marrow:cracked caribou bones a heap on the floor.A sinew, thickly wrapped in soot, threads throughthe meat on her chin: a tattoo in three slender lines.One white ptarmigan plume fastened to the lip ofa birch wood basket; thaw approaches: the plume turns brown.On the edge of the open lead, a toggle-head harpoonwaits to launch: bowhead sings to krill.Thickened pack ice cracking; a baleen fishing linepulls taut a silver dorsal fin of a round white fish.A slate-blade knife slices along the grain of a caribouhindquarter; the ice cellar lined in willow branches is empty.Saltwater suffuses into a flint quarry, offshorea thin layer of radiation glazes leathered walrus skin.Alongside shatters of a hummock, a marsh marigoldflattens under three black toes of a sandhill crane.A translucent sheep horn dipper skims a freshwater stream;underneath, arctic char lay eggs of mercury.Picked before the fall migration, cloudberriesdrench in whale oil, ferment in a sealskin poke.A tundra swan nests inside a rusted steel rum;she abandons her newborns hatched a deep crimson.
~~~
How many miles to the borderwhere all the sky there isexists for the soul alone?Where the only breathersbreathing are constructedfrom some new electricityand the flowers are madeindestructible, and messagesfrom the dead arrive like calmwhite birds with a gift?One more night of spiritualice and we might all becomebirds, green birds frozen on a black winter branch.There is a drumming in the shadowsunder leaves: a million eight-eyedspiders on the march.The buckeyes beat themselves half to death against some lit-from-within screen.
~~~
The field is filled  with what we see without sleep. Never completely  closed, it quickly erodes  when tilled before rain.  If clogged with boulders it won’t be razed and once burdened cannot quicken under flocks. The field reveals glint and holds leaning, pulls twist from taut knots of buds. We watch the field  for stirring, wait  for stems to spring  back from sparrows. We hope for a swell  in its middle so  we can say we saw  the sway that comes from noticing.  Water meanders to prairie potholes,  throws cordgrass into switchbacks as we push past  bramble and scare  a whistling wheel of geese into air. The field draws hawks and sides of trains, cradles pools from storms where ducks plumb for water snails.  We trample light  between us, no way to lope in parting the swales. We must flatten  to fill the space with all the rolling wrapped up in us.  Before home,  the gabled barn  across the road throws the brightest rise we’ve ever seen the field try on.  The field is not in rows, is not  a faded saw-songed croon. It pushes green a mist above mud, shows how we make do. We wonder what we’re not  in the field. What scours, cuts, or knocks. If we could stay and still feel full the low line rounding  out a spread of subtle slope.
~~~
I scratch earth around timpsila 
on this hill, while below me,
hanging in still air, a hawk
searches the creekbed for my brothers.
Squat leaves, I’ll braid your roots
into such long ropes, they’ll cover
the rump of my stallion.
Withered flower, feed us now
buffalo rot in the waist-high grass.
Hear my sisters laugh?
They dream of feasts, of warriors
to owl dance with them
when this war is over. They don’t see
our children eating treebark, cornstalks,
these roots. Their eyes gleam
in shallow cheeks. The wagon people
do not think relationship is wealth.
Sisters, last night the wind
returned my prayer, allowing me to hear
Dog Soldiers singing at Ash Hollow.
I threw away my blanket
stained with lies.
Above the wings of my tipi,
I heard the old woman in Maka Sica
sigh for us. Then I knew
the distance of High Back Bone’s death-
fire from another world away. Even they
may never stop its motion.
Yesterday at noon, I heard
my Cheyenne sister moan as she waded
through deep snow before soldiers
cut up her corpse to sell
as souvenirs. Are my brothers
here? Ghosts bring all my joy.
I walk this good road between rock
and sky. They dare not threaten with death
one already dead.
~~~
The shag rug of a Great Plains buffalo,
      a flightless bird
gone to stone: over its fellow keepsakes,
      into the archives of air,
the whale hauled a harvest of dust.
      In the ripples of glass
sealed over songbird skins, I wavered.
      What could be said for love?
From the Full-Serv to the Self-Serv Island
      at the Gulf station next door,
landlocked waves shivered in a row of corn.
      The great flukes lifted.
A Milky Way scarred the underside more vast
      than the Midwestern night.
Dark cargoes would give themselves up
      to these shallows
that waited to take home the sailor,
      home to the sea
of fossilized coral upon whose shoals
      just down the road
the motels of Coralville lay sprawled.
      Here would lie a ring
scratched by a scrivener with florid hand,
      In thy breast my heart does rest
flung back to shore, here rest two coins
      face to face, joined
by the salt that turned them faceless
      as they turned to each other.
~~~
The darkness draws me, kindly angels weep
Forlorn beyond receding rings of light,
The torrents of the earth’s desires sweep
My soul through twilight downward into night.
Once more the light grows dim, the vision fades,
Myself seems to myself a distant goal,
I grope among the bodies’ drowsy shades,
Once more the Old Illusion rocks my soul.
Once more the Manifold in shadowy streams
Of falling waters murmurs in my ears,
The One Voice drowns amid the roar of dreams
That crowd the narrow pathway of the years.
I go to seek the starshine on the,waves,
To count the dewdrops on the grassy hill,
I go to gather flowers that grow on graves,
The world’s wall closes round my prisoned will.
Yea, for the sake of the wild western wind
The sphered spirit scorns her flame-built throne,
Because of primroses, time out of mind,
The Lonely turns away from the Alone.
Who once has loved the cornfield’s rustling sheaves,
Who once has heard the gentle Irish rain
Murmur low music in the growing leaves,
Though he were god, comes back to earth again.
Oh Earth! green wind-swept Eirinn, I would break
The tower of my soul’s initiate pride
For a gray field and a star-haunted lake,
And those wet winds that roam the country side.
I who have seen am glad to close my eyes,
I who have soared am weary of my wings,
I seek no more the secret of the wise,
Safe among shadowy, unreal human things.
Blind to the gleam of those wild violet rays
That burn beyond the rainbow's circle dim,
Bound by dark nights and driven by pale days,
The sightless slave of Time’s imperious whim;
Deaf to the flowing tide of dreams divine
That surge outside the closed gates of birth,
The rhythms of eternity, too fine
To touch with music the dull ears of earth—
I go to seek with humble care and toil
The dreams I left undreamed, the deeds undone,
To sow the seed and break the stubborn soil,
Knowing no brightness whiter than the sun.
Content in winter if the fire burns clear
And cottage walls keep out the creeping damp,
Hugging the Old Illusion warm and dear,
The Silence and the Wise Book and the Lamp.
~~~
After Ed Sanders



We’d been squatting     near the worms            in the White House lawn, protesting the Keystone Pipeline =$=$=$=$=$=$=>>;             i could sense      the dear worms    through    the grillwork fence,              twists & coils   of flexi-script, remakingthe soil    by resisting it    ...                               After the ride in the police van              telling jokes, our ziplocked handcuffspretty tight,                      when the presiding officer asked: — Do you have any tattoos?  — Yes, officer, i have two. — What are they?  — Well, i have a black heart on my inner thigh &                an alchemical sign on my ankle. — Please spell that?  — Alchemical. A-L-C-H-E-M-I-C-A-L. — What is that?  — It’s basically a moon, a lily, a star & a flame. He started printing in the little square MOON, LILY, STAR  Young white guy, seemed scared. One blurry       tattoo on his inner wrist    ...     i should have asked             about his, but couldn’t cross that chasm.     Outside,   AshWednesday in our nation’s capital.     Dead               grass, spring trees about to burst, two officers           beside the newish van. Inside,              alchemical notes for the next time —
~~~
Since there is no escape, since at the end
My body will be utterly destroyed,
This hand I love as I have loved a friend,
This body I tended, wept with and enjoyed;
Since there is no escape even for me
Who love life with a love too sharp to bear:
The scent of orchards in the rain, the sea
And hours alone too still and sure for prayer—
Since darkness waits for me, then all the more
Let me go down as waves sweep to the shore
In pride, and let me sing with my last breath;
In these few hours of light I lift my head;
Life is my lover—I shall leave the dead
If there is any way to baffle death.
~~~
pilipinas to petatlán



she whispers desert trees, thorn-ridged, trickling yellow candles; roots spilling snakes’ blood
virgin of ribboned silk; virgin of gold filigree
one day’s walk westward, a crucifix of fisherman’s dinghy dimensions washes ashore
virgin adorned in robe of shark embryo and coconut husk
she fingers mollusks, wraps herself in sea vines
virgin of ocean voyage peril
she will herself born
virgin of mud brick ruins; virgin of sandstorm echoes
she is saint of commonplaces; saint of badlands
virgin of jade, camphor, porcelain; virgin of barter for ghosts
penitents, earthdivers of forgotten names praying skyward
virgin of scars blossomed from open veins of fire
she slips across the pacific’s rivers of pearldiving children
virgin of copper coins
she is bloodletting words, painting unlikeness
virgin of anachronism
children stained with berries and rust, their skeletons bend, arrow-tipped; smoke blurs eyes’ edges
virgin of mineral depletion; virgin of mercury
at other altitudes she remembers to breathe; a monument scraping cloud
virgin of tin deposits extracted from mountains
these are not divinations; there is goldleaf about her skin
virgin of naming and renaming places in between
~~~
Here I am saying “The leaves are falling”   —one of those choruses   that vie with interminable verses   to mock hoarders.   Yeah, we get   that a palette of winds   is a pretty thing:   one blurs the anther, another   the river splurging on riprap,   expunging   phosphates,   out of the temperature   differential building   sculptural fogs   that promenade   between shores a glacier   wedged ajar, a fjord.   Whatever gives the river   its seriousness reverses   in the light   of those clouds moving   as if absorbing   their pomp in advance of it—   characters   which untied the painter   and took the sculls again.
~~~
Dusk to dawn, sleek skunks enjoy
avocados in my yard. I give wide berth.
Before the first jogger leaves her prints
on pavement, tough raccoons appear.
They pretend they don’t hear my keys click
but they peek to make sure it’s me.
Foxes play hide-and-seek,
sometimes on our lawn, other times
across the street, but never after seven;
and brazen squirrels eye me
from the center of the street,
dare me to approach.
Will this be a day for Catalina eddies,
clouds stacked, catching like magnets
in a liquid air swirl?
Or will it blow a fierce Santa Ana,
days of fires in the hills,
smoldering chaparral,
winds so fierce birds do low-crawls?
I cast a spell for Santa Anas
the shallow coast a censer
mixed with black sage, Torrey Pine,
Engelmann oak—precious oils
to fumigate the San Diego skies,
the annual burning pulse.
~~~
Yellow pines    No ever    no green    except
where stems brown needles green    I walk
on the wooden train    The fall’s water you swam in
one cold morning    What you braved    That ice
path    A horse fence    Where fences are horses
with long hair    I braid the tale of the fall of stables
Four paws touch dirt    stirring
a flirt of sky a bundle of rare    You bundle
into stables    I open with sandy tongue
taste the grain of barkwater
I look at myself in
a mirror of weather
Rain trenzas    Dirt cups us    We drink
& spin like tornillos    A swallow’s nest    like an adobe
tornado    Shit & mud & feathers & forming pitchfork claws
Eggshells gone    We rest in the ocean smalls
the pink throat
The back door is also the front    The only
smoke hole    Feathers rise
& we follow
~~~
Hoarfrost coats and cuffs
the playing fields, a heyday
of glistening. So there’s hope
in my throat as I walk across them
to the woods with my chest
flung open, spilling its coins.
The light so bright I can hear it,
a silver tone like a penny whistle.
It’s fall, so I’m craving pine cones.
Hundreds of maples the color
of bulldozers!
            
          But something strange
is going on: the trees are tired
of meaning, sick of providing
mystery, parallels, consolation.
“Leave us alone,” they seem to cry,
with barely energy for a pun.
The muscular river crawls on
its belly in a maple coat of mail.
Muddy and unreflective, it smells
as if it too could use some privacy.
The sumac reddens like a face,
holding out its velvet pods
almost desperately. The Queen
Anne’s Lace clicks in the wind.
A deaf-mute milkweed
foaming at the mouth.
Back at the field I look
for what I didn’t mean
to drop. The grass is green.
                            Okay, Day,
my host, I want to get out
of your house. Come on, Night,
with your twinkly stars and big
dumb moon. Tell me don’t
show me, and wipe that grin
off your face.
~~~
This is the time lean woods shall spend
A steeped-up twilight, and the pale evening drink,
And the perilous roe, the leaper to the west brink,
Trembling and bright to the caverned cloud descend.
Now shall you see pent oak gone gusty and frantic,
Stooped with dry weeping, ruinously unloosing
The sparse disheveled leaf, or reared and tossing
A dreary scarecrow bough in funeral antic.
Then, tatter you and rend,
Oak heart, to your profession mourning; not obscure
The outcome, not crepuscular; on the deep floor
Sable and gold match lustres and contend.
And rags of shrouding will not muffle the slain.
This is the immortal extinction, the priceless wound
Not to be staunched. The live gold leaks beyond,
And matter’s sanctified, dipped in a gold stain.
~~~
‘How can the red men be forgotten, while so many of our states and territories, bays, lakes, and rivers, are indelibly stamped by names of their giving?’



Ye say they all have passed away,    That noble race and brave, That their light canoes have vanished    From off the crested wave; That ’mid the forests where they roamed    There rings no hunter shout, But their name is on your waters,    Ye may not wash it out. ’Tis where Ontario’s billow    Like Ocean’s surge is curled, Where strong Niagara’s thunders wake    The echo of the world. Where red Missouri bringeth    Rich tribute from the west, And Rappahannock sweetly sleeps    On green Virginia’s breast. Ye say their cone-like cabins,    That clustered o’er the vale, Have fled away like withered leaves    Before the autumn gale, But their memory liveth on your hills,    Their baptism on your shore, Your everlasting rivers speak    Their dialect of yore. Old Massachusetts wears it,    Within her lordly crown, And broad Ohio bears it,    Amid his young renown; Connecticut hath wreathed it    Where her quiet foliage waves, And bold Kentucky breathed it hoarse    Through all her ancient caves. Wachuset hides its lingering voice    Within his rocky heart, And Alleghany graves its tone    Throughout his lofty chart; Monadnock on his forehead hoar    Doth seal the sacred trust, Your mountains build their monument,    Though ye destroy their dust. Ye call these red-browned brethren    The insects of an hour, Crushed like the noteless worm amid    The regions of their power; Ye drive them from their father’s lands,    Ye break of faith the seal, But can ye from the court of Heaven     Exclude their last appeal? Ye see their unresisting tribes,    With toilsome step and slow, On through the trackless desert pass    A caravan of woe; Think ye the Eternal’s ear is deaf?    His sleepless vision dim? Think ye the soul’s blood may not cry    From that far land to him?
~~~
The forest is the only placewhere green is green and blue is blue.Walking the forest I have seenmost everything. I’ve seen a youwith yellow eyes and busted wing.And deep in the forest, no one knew.
~~~
 I will do everything you tell me, Mother. I will charm three gold hairs from the demon’s head. I will choke the mouse that gnaws an apple tree’s roots and keep its skin for a glove. To the wolf, I will be pretty and kind and curtsy his crossing of my path.   The forest, vocal   even in its somber tread, rages. A slope ends in a pit of foxes drunk on rotten brambles of berries and the raccoons ransack a rabbit’s unmasked hole. What do they find but a winter’s heap of droppings? A stolen nest, the cracked shell   of another creature’s child.   I imagine this is the rabbit way and I will not stray, Mother, into the forest’s thick, where the trees meet the dark, though I have known misgivings of light as a hot hand that flickers against my neck. The path ends   at a river I must cross. I will wait   for the ferryman to motion me through. Into the waves he etches with his oar a new story: a silent girl runs away, a silent girl is never safe. I will take his oar in my hand. I will learn the boat’s rocking and bring myself back   and forth. To be good   is the hurricane of caution. I will know indecision’s rowing, the water I lap into my lap as he shakes his withered head. Behind me is the forest. Before me the field, a loose run of grass. I stay in the river, Mother, I study escape. 
~~~
After bitter resistance the river unravels into the night, he says. Washes our daily fare of war out into a dark so deaf, so almost without dimension there is no word to dive from. Body weight displaced by dreams whose own lack promises lucidity so powerful it could shoot a long take to mindlessness. Fish smell travels the regions of sleep, westward like young men and the dawn. Then I return, too early to bring anything back, unsure of what I want, terrified I’ll fail, by a hair, to seize it.
We talk because we can forget, she says. Our bodies open to the dark, and sand runs out. Oblivion takes it all with equal tenderness. As the sea does. As the past. Already it suffuses the present with more inclusive tonalities. Not orchestrating a melodic sequence, but rounding the memory of a rooster on top a hanging silence. Or injured flesh. Impersonal. Only an animal could be so.
 
An avatar of the holy ghost, he chuckles. Or the angel of the annunciation beating his wings against a door slammed shut. Behind it, love already plays the organ. Without the angel. He is invisible because we have rejected his message.
On the old photos, she says, I see a stranger staking out my skin. As if an apple could fall too far from the tree. Yet I call her “me,” “my” years of furtively expanding flesh, with almost-certainty. It’s a belief that seems exempt from doubt, as if it were the hinge on which my doubts and questions turn. Still, I may seem the same “I” to you while I’ve already rolled it through the next door. From left to right.
~~~
Madness “hath builded her house in the high places of the city.”
— Guy Debord



Men are hanging themselves unaccompanied
by sound in the dark hours before the bottle shop opens
Rope snaking a branch of pepper tree
at the lodging house
Empty tenement. Dark windows bruised by sky
lighting rookeries of collapse and fire crumbling out
until the whole street is vacant
and mud caked
In ragged brown of summer verticordia I peed
near a midden of fleshy arils heaped at an anthill entrance
watched them drag seed deep instilling
acacia in dirt
Withering of certainty spits hisses
The swamps filling with drillholes guarded by adders
Air churned with a fierce screaming
warra! Warra.
Dumbbell of yield and sequence
Through years of discipline I learned containment
or vice versa as natural as speechlike
Upward spiral of spell
A nested equivalence this woundedness
Pinned fury petering in honeyeater as a falcon plucks
its way to the warm core, feathers wafting
down to soft eremophila
Sentences in the Bible begin with And God
As if starting was difficult and well populated
An excess of tangle and downcast
in need of name
The roof rats went quietly once
the python escaped to ceiling rafters of my father’s house
its coagulation of coils echoing shapes
of a nearby bogong moth
~~~
Then in the August of my twenty-seventh year,
naked except for my seaclogs,
I greeted an audience of piers.
After my dip, I came up covered
in salt and sand: hair tough as an angel’s.
Who could disappoint me now among the so-coifed?
Disappointing menus for a banquet of twenty-seven.
The hostess cannot hear the hotelier, walls blow ope’;
lousy with wallets and checkbooks, the air. Naked except for
The checks and the monies flapped like birds.
I partook of the seasonal activity
and caught a check in my hands—to myself from myself—
and was caught; I was smart and dumb.
I hadn’t been clobbered in such a long time!
Now, shoved against the carpeted headrest,
I wondered at its cold and slender neck.
The nakeder I feel the happier.
Camp is over, and the children come out
wearing hats; the children are happy for each other,
each camp having been maximally appropriate.
The ocean grew gritty with proteins. I arose
and clomb to the yard with its spigot.
It looked up and blinked. Above, kite strings wrotetoing and froing was the same motion; tiny sighs above the halls
at the county airport; swung on tiny chains;
my father swathed me in two handtowels,
said nexttime, swim in the sea.
A gold thread falls from an eagle’s towel
onto the beach. A gold face big as a quarter of the sky
looks at us with gold-milk tears in its eyes
and the gold girl goes on brushing the countryside
with a twig-broom big as a tree. When our competitor
finishes third, he approaches the throne
with a gold wheel of tillamook.
~~~
I have been known to birth a mountain whole,a range of them in my belly,I popped them out one by one.The blood-cut son born black,I could not believe the wholeness of him,the crushed diamond of his face.And then the other,who flew from me, a shooting star;a twin mirror girl, whose orchid faceopened and opened and opened.There were more of them,one born of water, one of fire,one for every element.But now my mountain days are done.The red night clouds, the afterbirth,the snail shell whorls of them.The unborns we named:Beinn Narnain, Ben Vane, Beinn Ime,Ben Vorlich, and Beinn Bhuidhe
~~~
The Moon is distant from the Sea –
And yet, with Amber Hands –
She leads Him – docile as a Boy –
Along appointed Sands –
He never misses a Degree –
Obedient to Her eye –
He comes just so far – toward the Town –
Just so far – goes away –
Oh, Signor, Thine, the Amber Hand –
And mine – the distant Sea –
Obedient to the least command
Thine eye impose on me –
~~~
Before my first communion, I clung to doubt 
     as Satan spider-like stalked 
          the orb of dark surrounding Eden for a wormhole into paradise. 
    God had formed me from gel in my mother’s womb, 
          injected by my dad’s smart shoot. They swapped sighs until 
     I came, smaller than a bite of burger. 
          Quietly, I grew till my lungs were done then the Lord sailed a soul 
     like a lit arrow to inhabit me. 
          Maybe that piercing made me howl at birth, 
     or the masked creatures whose scalpel 
          cut a lightning bolt to free me. I was hoisted by the heels and swatted, fed 
     and hauled around. Time-lapse photos show 
          my fingers grow past crayon outlines, my feet come to fill spike heels. 
     Eventually, I lurched out 
          to kiss the wrong mouths, get stewed, and sulk around. Christ always stood 
     to one side with a glass of water. 
          I swatted the sap away. When my thirst got great enough to ask, 
     a clear stream welled up inside, 
          some jade wave buoyed me forward, and I found myself upright 
     in the instant, with a garden 
          inside my own ribs aflourish. There, the arbor leafs. 
     The vines push out plump grapes. 
          You are loved, someone said. Take that 
          and eat it.
~~~
    In Tamalpais is a big crystal. An acquaintance told
me the story. A Miwok was giving his grandfather’s medicine
bag to the Kroeber Museum in Berkeley. He said this man
took him over the mountain Tamalpais, at a certain time
in the year. I believe it was about the time of the
Winter Solstice, because then the tides are really low.
They stopped and gathered a certain plant on the way over
the mountain. On their way to the Bolinas Beach clam patch,
where there is a big rock way out there.
                                                                            Go out to
the rock. Take out of the medicine bag the crystal
that matches the crystal in Tamalpais. And
                                              if your heart is not true
                                              if your heart is not true
when you tap the rock in the clam patch
                                                            a little piece of it will fly off
                                                   and strike you in the heart
                          and strike you dead.
And that’s the first story I ever heard about Bolinas.
~~~
(in memory of José Antonio Burciaga, 1947-1996)                          

                     We are chameleons. We become chameleon.
                             —José Antonio Burciaga  ﻿



We are space between—

the black-orange blur

of a million Monarchs

on their two-generation migration

south to fir-crowned Michoacán

where tree trunks will sprout feathers,

a forest of paper-thin wings.

 

Our Mexica cocooned

in the membranes de la Madre Tierra

say we are reborn zacuanpapalotls,

mariposas negras y anaranjadas

in whose sweep the dead whisper.

 

We are between—

the flicker of a chameleon’s tail

that turns his desert-blue backbone

to jade or pink sand,

the snake-skinned fraternal twins

of solstice and equinox.

 

The ashen dawn, silvering dusk,

la oración as it leaves the lips,

the tug from sleep,

the glide into dreams

that husk out mestizo memory.

 

We are—

one life passing through the prism

of all others, gathering color and song,

cempazuchil and drum

to leave a rhythm scattered on the wind,

dust tinting the tips of fingers

as we slip into our new light.
~~~
My house is the red earth; it could be the center of the world. I’ve heard New York, Paris, or Tokyo called the center of the world, but I say it is magnificently humble. You could drive by and miss it. Radio waves can obscure it. Words cannot construct it, for there are some sounds left to sacred wordless form. For instance, that fool crow, picking through trash near the corral, understands the center of the world as greasy strips of fat. Just ask him. He doesn’t have to say that the earth has turned scarlet through fierce belief, after centuries of heartbreak and laughter—he perches on the blue bowl of the sky, and laughs.
~~~
It is mid-October. The trees are in  their autumnal glory (red, yellow-green, orange) outside the classroom where students  take the mid-term, sniffling softly as if identifying lines from Blake or Keats was such sweet sorrow, summoned up in words they never saw before. I am thinking of my parents, of the six decades they’ve been together, of the thirty thousand meals they’ve eaten in the kitchen, of the more than twenty thousand nights they’ve slept under the same roof. I am wondering who could have fashioned the test that would have predicted this success? Who could have known?
~~~
Still will I harvest beauty where it grows:
In coloured fungus and the spotted fog
Surprised on foods forgotten; in ditch and bog
Filmed brilliant with irregular rainbows
Of rust and oil, where half a city throws
Its empty tins; and in some spongy log
Whence headlong leaps the oozy emerald frog. . . .
And a black pupil in the green scum shows.
Her the inhabiter of divers places
Surmising at all doors, I push them all.
Oh, you that fearful of a creaking hinge
Turn back forevermore with craven faces,
I tell you Beauty bears an ultra fringe
Unguessed of you upon her gossamer shawl!
 
~~~
Hunted and sung
unhunted / unsung
clump of
loghouse / chaxed hill
unuttered / unstrung
clistered bow
hunted and unsung
hunted / strung
hunted / sung.
~~~
Barely discerned clouds
Hard, hard to get here
what worth, what worth
River of steel.
River of no one becoming you.
Trees that are emptier today, more forced in their forms
To focus on them is to be made glad of them in their
       strangeness
The earth extrudes through them toward emptiness
The few elms dismembering
The willow’s bloom above shore like a curtaining
To focus on it is to be mostly taken into its tapes
       and its filters
It is lost to the surface of this river
The dull, impenetrable, intractable surface
resisting, unetchable
Now the faint rain.
I don’t know what to do with all this waiting
things getting themselves readied toward emptiness
The scratchy, shattering elm, its crimped skin, its
       exfoliating, its rivening
       its being disfigured by fortune
       and by wind
A crone with old frills at her hair
The grasp of her toward me
~~~
You could figure it as a trapdoor, blur of hinge and                          down into the unconscious of this stranger moving around your garden like a trap— making all the greens unstable as the warble of nausea come bang up to greet you. Bang to rights is how he'd like to have your house. Cuckoo, wool-wearing garden-dweller, new-age Salvationist, holy among your cow-parsley and roses.                Meanwhile, the unaccustomed heat. Meanwhile, a sky tunnelling upward— sense of proportion—golden section  of elder hedge; then the disgraceful paddock gone wild.
~~~
Highlight Actions
Enable or disable annotations




I started Early – Took my Dog –
And visited the Sea –
The Mermaids in the BasementBasement i.e., the bottom of the ocean
Came out to look at me –
And FrigatesFrigates fast and highly maneuverable warships of the 18th and 19th centuries, used to escort other larger ships, or to patrol the coast and blockade harbors – in the Upper Floor
Extended Hempen HandsHempen Hands strong, thick ropes made of hemp, used on ships –
Presuming Me to be a Mouse –
Aground – oponopon upon the Sands –
But no Man moved Me – till the Tide
Went past my simple Shoe –
And past my Apron – and my Belt
And past my BoddiceBoddice bodice; an upper part of a woman’s dress, or a rigid, laced corset worn underneath clothing, covering the upper part of a woman’s body – too –
And made as He would eat me up –
As wholly as a Dew
Opon a Dandelion's Sleeve –
And then – I started – too –
And He – He followed – close behind –
I felt His Silver Heel
Opon my Ancle – Then My Shoes
Would overflow with Pearl –
Until We met the Solid Town –
No One He seemed to know –
And bowing – with a Mighty look –
At me – The Sea withdrew –
 
~~~
WrittenJanuary 1718in the Chiosk at Peraoverlooking Constantinople



Give me Great God (said I) a Little Farmin Summer shady, & in Winter warmwhere a cool spring gives birth to a clear brookby Nature slideing down a mossy RockNot artfully in Leaden Pipes convey'dOr greatly falling in a forc'd CascadePure & unsully'd winding throu' ye Shade.All bounteous Heaven has added to my Praiera softer Climate and a purer Air.Our Frozen Isle now chilling Winter bindsDeform'd by Rains, & rough wth blasting Windsye wither'd Woods grown white wth hoary Frostby driving storms their scatter'd beautys lostThe Trembling birds their leaveless coverts shunAnd seek in distant Climes a warmer SunThe Water Nymphs their silenced Urns deploreEven Thames benumb'd a River now no moreThe barren Meadows give no more delightby Glist'ning Snows made painfull to ye Sight.Here Summer reigns wth one Eternal SmileAnd double Harvests bless ye happy Soil.Fair, fertile Fields to warm Indulgent HeavenHas every Charm of every Season given!No Killing Cold deforms ye Beauteous YearThe springing Flowers no coming Winter FearBut as ye Parent Rose decays & diesye Infant Buds wth brighter Colours riseAnd with fresh sweets ye Mother-scent supplysNear them the Vi'let glows wth odours blestAnd blooms in more than Tyrian Purple drestThe rich Jonquils their golden gleam displayAnd shine in glorys emulateing day.These chearfull Groves their living Leaves retainThe Streams still murmur undefil'd by RainAnd growing Green adorns ye Fruitfull PlainThe warbling Kind uninterrupted Sing,Warm'd wth Enjoyment of perpetual Spring.Here from my Window I at once surveyThe crouded City, & resounding SeaIn distant Views see Assian Mountains riseAnd Lose their Snowy Summits in ye Skies.Above those Mountains high Olympus Tow'rsThe Parliamental Seat of Heavenly Powers.New to ye Sight my ravish'd Eyes admireEach guilded Crescent & each Antique SpireThe Fair Serail where sunk in Idle easeThe Lazy Monarch melts his thoughtless daysThe Marble Mosques beneath whose Ample DomesFierce Warlike Sultans sleep in peacefull TombsThose lofty Structures once the Christian boastTheir Names, their Honnours, & their Beautys lostThose Altars bright wth Gold, wth Sculpture grac'dBy barbarous Zeal of savage Foes defac'dConvents where Emperors profess'd of oldThe Labour'd Pillars that their Triumphs told.Vain Monuments of Men that once were great!Sunk, undistinguish'd, by one Common Fate!How art thou falln Imperial City, Low!Where are thy Hopes of Roman Glory now?Where are thy Palaces by Prelates rais'dWhere preistly Pomp in Purple Lustre blaz'd?So vast, that Youthfull Kings might there resideSo Splendid; to content a Patriarchs prideWhere Grecian Artists all their skill displaydBefore ye happy Sciences decay'd;So vast, that Youthfull Kings might there resideSo Splendid; to content a Patriarchs Pride;Convents where Emperors proffess'd of Old,The Labour'd Pillars that their Triumphs told,Vain Monuments of Men that once were great!Sunk, undistinguish'd in one common Fate!One Little Spot, the small Fenar contains,Of Greek Nobillity, the poor Remains,Where other Helens show like powerfull CharmsAs once engag'd the Warring World in Arms:Those Names that Roial Auncestry can boastIn mean Mechanic Arts obscurely lostThose Eyes a second Homer might inspire,fix'd at the Loom, destroy their useless Fire.Greiv'd at a view which strikes vpon my MindThe short liv'd Vanity of Human kindIn Gaudy Objects I indulge my Sight,And turn where Eastern Pomp gives gay delight.See; the vast Train in various Habits dress'd!By the Bright Seymetar and Sable Vest;The Vizier proud, distinguish'd o're the rest!Six slaves in gay Attire his Bridle hold;His Bridle rough with Gems, his Stirups Gold;His Snowy Steed adorn'd with lavish PrideWhole Troops of Soldiers mounted by his Side,These toss the Plumy Crest, Arabian Coursers guide.With awfull Duty all decline their Eyes,No bellowing Shouts of noisy Crouds arise;Silence in solemn State the march attendsTill at the dread Divan the slow processions ends.Yet not these Objects all profusely Gay,The Gilded Navy that adorns the Sea,The riseing City in Confusion fair;Magnificently form'd irregularWhere Woods and Palaces at once surpriseGardens, on Gardens, Domes on Domes ariseAnd endless Beauties tire the wandering Eyes,So sooths my Wishes, or so charms my Mind,As this Retreat, secure from Human kind.No Knaves successfull Craft does Spleen exciteNo Coxcombs tawdry Splendour shocks my Sight;No Mob Alarm awakes my Female Fears,No unrewarded Merit asks my Tears;Nor Praise my Mind, nor Envy hurts my Ear,Even Fame it selfe can hardly reach me here,Impertinence with all her Tattling TrainFair-sounding Flatterys delicious BaneCensorious Folly; Noisy Party Rage;The Thousand with which she must engageWho dare have Virtue in a Vicious Age.
~~~
You plan an uncomplicated path
through Colorado’s red dust,
around the caustic edge of Utah’s salt flats
a single night at a hotel
in the Idaho panhandle. Our plans change.
It’s spring, we are two Indian women along
together and the days open:
sunrise on a fine long road,
antelope against dry hills,
heron emerging from dim fields.
You tell me this is a journey
you’ve always wanted to take.
You ask me to tell you what I want.
I want my longing to miraculously
bring you through the barrier of your skin
into my blood so that I can possess you
entirely and yet be entirely possessed.
You say no, your face tight with pain, tears
burning your eyes, hands clenching the steering wheel.
I believe you. We drive hundreds of miles
across deserts sculpted by wind and story,
and I learn distance from my hand to your thigh,
your mouth to my mouth, the curve of a collar
along a warm, smooth neck.
You grin as if no one has ever seen you thus:
naked, savage, happy.
That is the beginning of yes.
Ghosts are everywhere.
We hear them singing on that mountain in Ute country,
the cries of your flute pleasuring old spirits.
Like those people whose land we cross,
we don’t live by lines drawn on paper.
Instead, we mark the waterfall of shy kisses,
a dry windy town where we exchange secrets in whispers,
the high cliff hollow that shelters us
on the edge of the Uinta forest.
Wildflowers bend beneath our bodies,
cup the trembling weight of touch.
We wander for awhile in a place vast enough
to contain all possibilities.
After twelve hundred miles together
we enter green forest thick along a fearless river.
This dense topography we can’t see through,
can’t find the horizon to judge distances
or the arc of the sun to know east from west.
There at last you clasp my hand, guide it
to a place beyond maps,
no universe I have ever known.
It is a raw landscape; we are the sojourners
overcome by the perilous shock of arrival.
We stop the car, walk by the river,
clumsy, frightened by desire. I wish
for more than body or soul can bear.
Sweet, these are the maps we made together,
territories we foolishly vowed to own.
Here, the place we wandered off the map,
moved deep into a land without scars
where every direction took us home
but no place could give us shelter.
I don’t know how to survive awakening
in a woman’s body with a child’s
broken heart. I fall on my knees, our love
a bare stone on the windowsill between us.
How can I learn this trick, will your body
back to the other side of my skin? Help me
translate loss the way this land does—
flood, earthquake, landslide—
terrible, and alive.
~~~
Roads around mountainscause we can’t drivethroughThat’s Poetryto Me.
~~~
I   The teacher said inner truth and the chalk said like a fresco inside the earththat no one has ever seenand one day decides to be discoveredand begins to breathe—do you know what that means?   II   The child broke the chalk. The mother said be strong. The child said when I die I want to be a dwarf.  III   A detective has just drawn a circle with a piece of chalk, a private circle from which the victim will eventually look up, not at random, not at will, but when it calls to her, the chalk, the crushed bones of sea creatures who ringed the earth when it was under water.   IV   A man sits in the bath house in a deep tub of fizzling yellow water that surrounds every hair on his body and makes it stand upright. When the attendant comes, she will clean the tub by moving her hand slowly around the ring, like a snail.   V   An atoll is a ring of coral protecting a tureen of plankton. It is easy and Japanese to be sad knowing something is going to pass. He put the ring on her chalky finger.   VI   Long after chalk had passed out of use, carpenters still felt for it in their pockets and looked aimlessly at the sky.   VII   The cathedral was roofless. It began to snow inside. A half broken pillar in the nave grew taller.
~~~
What is this tint that in the shrill cress
Will never cease to trouble us and in the fields
Gives prick and praise for Beauty?
And said birds that feed on berries
Are pervious—and shook the snow from his thighs.
I thought of nothing carefully, but of snow, and the birds.
Then kissed the cup and sipped a little
Though almost choked drank slowly
Tickled with strange measure
She faked a pretty anger
I entertained the night with fantastic, empty pleasure
We went as far as the ivie-bush
And ivie-crowns upon our heads
And carried her kiss untouched and entire
Then all was fresh, inclined
To wriggle and nussle and lascivious
Ardent leaps. In the thickest of the wood
Bid him kiss close and often
And directed him to her fancie
The ground had a sweeter scent, the boughs a blush
One fruit, rare and rich, would outdo many together
She was wild to climb the tree
Nor would she be forbidden
She seized the apple and put it in her bosom.
~~~
I. ANCIENT OVERTURE OF HÉ﻿RODIADE
 
The Nurse
 (Incantation)
 
Abolished, and her frightful wing in the tears
Of the basin, abolished, that mirrors forth our fears,
The naked golds lashing the crimson space,
An Aurora—heraldic plumage—has chosen to embrace
Our cinerary tower of sacrifice,
Heavy tomb that a songbird has fled, lone caprice
Of a dawn vainly decked out in ebony plumes…
Ah, mansion this sad, fallen country assumes!
No splashing! the gloomy water, standing still,
No longer visited by snowy quill
Or fabled swan, reflects the bereaving
Of autumn extinguished by its own unleaving,
Of the swan when amidst the cold white tomb
Of its feathers, it buried its head, undone
By the pure diamond of a star, but one
Of long ago, which never even shone.
 
Crime! torture! ancient dawn! bright pyre!
Empurpled sky, complicit in the mire,
And stained-glass windows opening red on carnage.
 
The strange chamber, framed in all the baggage
Of a warlike age, its goldwork dull and faint,
Has yesteryear’s snows instead of its ancient tint;
And its pearl-gray tapestry, useless creases
With the buried eyes of prophetesses
Offering Magi withered fingers. One,
With floral past enwoven on my gown
Bleached in an ivory chest and with a sky
Bestrewn with birds amidst the embroidery
Of tarnished silver, seems a phantom risen,
An aroma, roses, rising from the hidden
Couch, now void, the snuffed-out candle shrouds,
An aroma, over the sachet, of frozen golds,
A drift of flowers unfaithful to the moon
(Though the taper’s quenched, petals still fall from one),
Flowers whose long regrets and stems appear
Drenched in a lonely vase to languish there…
An Aurora dragged her wings in the basin’s tears!
 
Magical shadow with symbolic powers!
A voice from the distant past, an evocation,
Is it not mine prepared for incantation?
In the yellow folds of thought, still unexhumed,
Lingering, and like an antique cloth perfumed,
Spread on a pile of monstrances grown cold,
Through ancient hollows and through stiffened folds
Pierced in the rhythm of the pure lace shroud
Through which the old veiled brightness is allowed
To mount, in desperation, shall arise
(But oh, the distance hidden in those cries!)
The old veiled brightness of a strange gilt-silver,
Of the languishing voice, estranged and unfamiliar:
Will it scatter its gold in an ultimate splendor,
And, in the hour of its agony, render
Itself as the anthem for psalms of petition?
For all are alike in being brought to perdition
By the power of old silence and deepening gloom,
Fated, monotonous, vanquished, undone,
Like the sluggish waters of an ancient pond.
 
Sometimes she sang an incoherent song.
Lamentable sign!
                             the bed of vellum sheets,
Useless and closed–not linen!—vainly waits,
Bereft now of the cherished grammary
That spelled the figured folds of reverie,
The silken tent that harbored memory,
The fragrance of sleeping hair. Were these its treasure?
Cold child, she held within her subtle pleasure,
Shivering with flowers in her walks at dawn,
Or when the pomegranate’s flesh is torn
By wicked night! Alone, the crescent moon
On the iron clockface is a pendulum
Suspending Lucifer: the clepsydra pours
Dark drops in grief upon the stricken hours
As, wounded, each one wanders a dim shade
On undeciphered paths without a guide!
All this the king knows not, whose salary
Has fed so long this agèd breast now dry.
Her father knows it no more than the cruel
Glacier mirroring his arms of steel,
When sprawled on a pile of corpses without coffins
Smelling obscurely of resin, he deafens
With dark silver trumpets the ancient pines!
Will he ever come back from the Cisalpines?
Soon enough! for all is bad dream and foreboding!
On the fingernail raised in the stained glass, according
To the memory of the trumpets, the old sky burns,
And to an envious candle it turns
A finger. And soon, when the sad sun sinks,
It shall pierce through the body of wax till it shrinks!
No sunset, but the red awakening
Of the last day concluding everything
Struggles so sadly that time disappears,
The redness of apocalypse, whose tears
Fall on the child, exiled to her own proud
Heart, as the swan makes its plumage a shroud
For its eyes, the old swan, and is carried away
From the plumage of grief to the eternal highway
Of its hopes, where it looks on the diamonds divine
Of a moribund star, which never more shall shine!
~~~
We have had our lives.
The reservoir visible
In the window beside our elbows, and the willow
Branches trailing at our stop
Are the nature we leave
Behind us gladly, since it has no place
For all we have recently learned: that sex
Is temporary, help
Ours to hand down now, and materials science
Not the only kind. We thank
Calm, careful Minerva, goddess
Of adults, who for so many years took us
To school: her voice the timbre of fretless bass,
Her eyes the color of pencil lead, she taught
Us how to behave in order to have our rewards
In twenty years. We have them, and if we wish
Too often, this fall, to have led another life
We do not mean that we would give up ours:
Though we stand in a row and sway
Before an obstructed view, we are able to find
Initials outlined in the crosshatched trees,
And pebbles—calculi—around our ponds
And cherish them; we like to watch the roads
Along which the perennial pollen sifts down
As finely as ever, making a soft powder
Of brass amid the troughs in softball fields.
Our skills are finally in demand.
If you mock us, Pan,
In whom we also believe, do it
As gently as you can.
~~~
Born again on a Monday
under a broken zodiac.
 
My father the woodman, a surgeon among snags,
could read the living trail of blades rebounding
in the field, the mopped-matte passage through the dew.
 
He woke a brush pile with fire
throwing shadows on the child, I was
thrown over.
 
Father, it was a pleasure to meet you
on this luminous route between two lives.
 
In this impromptu pool reaped from rain
where mosquitos multiply.
 
Though survival, I’m told, is impersonal
and without teleological purpose.
Malaria is just trying to maximize its own fitness
 
as are the corporations who, for palm oil set
the peatlands ablaze and drained the water table.
 
 
Dense haze from the sea
     choked the light from day
 
           suffused our mountain
in a numinous red corona.
And as for the getting over
 
there will be no ascension,
no circumambulation,
there is only going through.
 
We must go through it.
~~~
All that is uncared for.
Left alone in the stillness
in that pure silence married
to the stillness of nature.
A door off its hinges,
shade and shadows in an empty room.
Leaks for light. Raw where
the tin roof rusted through.
The rustle of weeds in their
different kinds of air in the mornings,
year after year.
A pecan tree, and the house
made out of mud bricks. Accurate
and unexpected beauty, rattling
and singing. If not to the sun,
then to nothing and to no one.
~~~
1. The Letter
Everywhere the windows give up nothing
but frost’s intricate veined foliage.
Just engines shrilling pocked and frozen streets
wailing toward some new disaster.   
No bright angels’ ladders going to split
heaven this Chicago instant where the pier’s   
an iced fantastic: spiked, the glacial floes
seize it greedy like a careless treasure—
marquise diamonds, these round clear globes, the psychic’s
crystal world spinning in her corner shop
when I passed, a globe boundaried with turning
silent winds and demons. Out here the pavement’s
a slick graffitied strip: There’s more to life
than violence.
~~~
     AUTUMN
gold of amber
red of ember
brown of umber
all September
      MCCOY CREEK
 
Over the bright shallows
now no flights of swallows.
Leaves of the sheltering willow
dangle thin and yellow.
 
     OCTOBER
 
At four in the morning the west wind
moved in the leaves of the beech tree
with a long rush and patter of water,
first wave of the dark tide coming in.
 
     SOLSTICE
 
On the longest night of all the year
in the forests up the hill,
the little owl spoke soft and clear
to bid the night be longer still.
 
     THE WINDS OF MAY
 
are soft and restless
in their leafy garments
that rustle and sway
making every moment movement.
 
     HAIL
 
The dogwood cowered under the thunder
and the lilacs burned like light itself
against the storm-black sky until the hail
whitened the grass with petals.
 
 
~~~
Murmurs from the earth of this land, from the caves and craters,
       from the bowl of darkness. Down watercourses of our
       dragon childhood, where we ran barefoot.
We stand as growing women and men. Murmurs come down
        where water has not run for sixty years.
Murmurs from the tulip tree and the catalpa, from the ax of
        the stars, from the house on fire, ringing of glass; from
        the abandoned iron-black mill.
Stars with voices crying like mountain lions over forgotten
        colors.
Blue directions and a horizon, milky around the cities where the
        murmurs are deep enough to penetrate deep rock.
Trapping the lightning-bird, trapping the red central roots.
You know the murmurs. They come from your own throat.
You are the bridges to the city and the blazing food-plant green;
The sun of plants speaks in your voice, and the infinite shells of
        accretions
A beach of dream before the smoking mirror.
You are close to that surf, and the leaves heated by noon, and
        the star-ax, the miner’s glitter walls. The crests of the sea
Are the same strength you wake with, the darkness is the eyes
        of children forming for a blaze of sight and soon, soon,
Everywhere your own silence, who drink from the crater, the
        nebula, one another, the changes of the soul.
~~~
"The wild will keep calling and calling forever in your ears. You
cannot escape the 'little voices.'"
—Frank Wild



1.
Here I rest, in South Georgia.
A few feet of evolution away
lie the graves of whale hunters, pointing north.
A white fence shields them from elephant seals
and their apocalyptic screams that each day warn
of the end of the world, or maybe the beginning. . .
 
I survived five expeditions to the Pole.
The one before last, “Imperial Trans-Antarctica,” nearly killed me.
For two years I put up with the ice—no man can reap or sow
       these fields.
And, unlike farmers, I didn’t even need to ask God for rain,
because ice is sated
and more desolate than the Sahara.
 
I survived distance. Wrote one message after another
beginning with a capital letter and a "PS." at the end.
My own personal post office under my pillow
closed for two years already, on holiday.
 
I survived six month-long polar days and nights;
to this day, I don't know which one was worse.
 
My epitaph is simple. Carved in granite:
                         FRANK WILD
                         18 April 1873
                         19 August 1939
                         “Shackleton’s
                          Right Hand Man”
From those cast away here
by a defect in the engine of the ship
or nostalgia of the womb.
 
2.
Ah yes. . . in the beginning was the ship. The ship stuck in ice.
      Endurance. 
Ships are women. They prefer soft seas.
In the best-case scenario, she’s called La Santa Maria 
and she throws you, like Columbus, on some foreign shore.
 
But if you get too close to her. . .
 
The very day after
we washed her deck with warm water and soap,
warmed her arteries with gin,
stroked her lower back with our surrogate songs,
shaved our beards and exposed the illiterate lines on our faces,
she took off.
 
And from the shore,
we saw how she broke her ribs, sinking,
aft first, so fast we didn’t even have time to pray,
leaving behind her ash-tree fragrance
and faux pearls on the water.
 
“Such a woman!” someone laughed bitterly,
“She knows when to leave so as not to be forgotten.”
 
3.
A woman, naturally, has no business there.
Antarctica is a masculine continent—
male penguins keep the eggs warm,
the moon stands up on the street to urinate
after being kicked out of the tavern,
the cold like a cut-throat razor, dulled for three thousand years,
and the sled dogs, the Huskies,
we kill with a single bullet
so they won’t starve to death. In this way
we instill a little character into the new land
before the arrival of Conquistadors, thieves,
assassins, missionaries, prostitutes,
the first invading army of every continent.
 
Antarctica is a man’s continent,
because only a man chooses to break into the darkness of the mind
by conquering the body,
as Amundsen and Scott did, their glory
reaching to the apex of ecstasy.
Zero degree of geographical latitude,
utter collapse.
 
4.
Hunger is overestimated. The stomach functions much like the
     brain:
when it has nothing to think about, it feeds off memories.
It can last three days just thinking of a single biscuit.
But those who have a better memory, meaning a much stronger
     acidity,
can go on for months
remembering a slice of prosciutto, two fried eggs,
sweetly folding their eyelids like napkins after a meal.
 
Then hallucinations begin. Banquets. Easter supper.
Feet move impatiently under the table;
the scent of rosemary wafts from a platter
and two clean serving hands with burns here and there.
That's when you feel grief-stricken
and you attack the seals and penguins with your
alpine knives and shoes like a madman
in an empty amphitheater.
Or is this, too, a hallucination,
and in this case not ours
but Antarctica's?
 
And when clarity finally returns,
both stomach and brain
notice only their own deep wrinkles.
 
 
5.
Blubber, blubber, seal's blubber.
Blubber that keeps your spirits alive, rendering it for fuel, for light,
blubber to mask the body's foul odor,
—a mixture of doubt, hope, and ammonia.
And if you have nothing better to do,
think of a cow's thigh hanging at the butcher's,
its delicate streak of fat
like a silk ribbon.
 
I survived even this sarcasm.
 
And every night, before bed,
we read recipes to each other
one of a few things we secretly rescued
from the ship before she sank,
as if these items were her lingerie.
 
What a show it was!
What pathos in pronouncing prosciutto, sugar, omelet!
What sensuality in milk, parsley, cinnamon!
We made these words up ourselves.
Nothing exists until its moment of absence.
 
But first, in order to warm up our mouths
like actors before going on stage,
we'd repeat mechanically, palates dry,
"Bless us, O Lord,
and this food we've received through your mercy.”
 
 
6.
It was the Romans who spoiled the word
studying rhetoric
before anatomy and mathematics:Vir bonus dicendi peritus
“The good man skilled in speaking" (Marcus Porcius Cato)
 
But in Antarctica, words are measured differently: by calories!
With a simple greeting you lose five calories,
just as many to keep a fire burning for a full minute.
And a Ciceronian argument can consume a whole day’s
      nutrition;
think carefully before you open your mouth.
 
The word is overestimated.
 
Sometimes it’s enough to avert your eyes from your shoes
to imply “gangrene”;
and a vague exchange of glances between men
is enough to understand that the ice is cracking beneath your feet
and death is closer than your fingers.
 
7.
Stretched smooth from end to end—such is Antarctica. In fact,
even a baby’s skin looks withered by comparison.  
No emotions. No regrets. No warnings.
Either fight or die.
 
My father was like this more or less. A teacher at a village school.
In classrooms that smelled of sheep-wool pullovers
drying on the body. And eyes that moved freely
in their hollows, like toes
inside an older sibling’s shoes.
 
Unlike the Romans,
my father preached about justice and honor
his hands folded behind his back.
His shoulders seemed twice as wide
as his worn jacket.
 
I inherited his sharp, gray gaze
and his soft voice.
Eyes that say “Go” and a voice that says “Stay.”
You never know which one to trust.
 
 
8.
And mother? Oh, she was simply Captain Cook’s niece,
—the great James Cook—
from morning to night
when she washed, swept, dug potatoes from the garden,
fixed her husband’s tie on Sundays
even from her bed, while in labor.
She never spoke of this. As it wasn’t necessary.
People speak of what they have, not what they are.
 
She was a tailor. Measured everyone's perimeter with a glance;
erred only on the width of one’s neck, an unknown strength.
Her large scissors followed
the white chalk line on the cloth so precisely. "Snip!"
She said little. Her silence followed the white outlines
of another tailor,
over a fabric much older than she was.
 
But now that I think of it,
how did the poor woman respond to her friends asking,
"Where is your son?"
"He's exploring the world."
"And what does he bring back from there?"
"Himself, alive, I hope."
"What's the point of returning empty-handed after two years?”
 
Was she at least a little proud of me? Of her Frank?
Certainly not. She was Captain Cook's niece.
The past always conquers.
 
 
9.
I was the first of thirteen children.
And as a rule, each of them
eyed one of my belongings.
One eyed my bed near the window
that overlooked the water where frogs lived
and asparagus grew on the shore.
Another eyed my green jacket bought with borrowed money,
poker cards, a fishing net,
my wicker chair with the damaged back.
Another whistled my favorite tune:
"What Will We Do with a Drunken Sailor?”
without reaching the refrain.
And yet another envied the basement
—that place I occupied in my father’s heart—
 with its elm door hanging by a single hinge.
 
But the time hasn't come to leave home just yet,
until your own brother begins to use your shaving kit
and dreams of the same girl.
 
 
10.
What shaving kit? Antarctica makes you grow a double-beard
as if you were a hundred-year-old grave.
And, while you remember wasting time waiting in line at
      barber's
another beard grows, a red one.
 
Here, each body part works for itself:
the stomach, hands, intestines, eyes. . .
The unity of the body is overestimated, too.
 
Only skin pulls everything together like a sled.
The skin? Which skin? Man loses his first skin
to his first love, like the snake early in spring
on a thorn-apple bush that blocks the way.
From that point on he stops counting the rest.
 
11. 
I don’t know why it was named “Elephant Island,”
when it answered the ocean with the cries of a she-wolf.
We could only make out her sly teats under her belly. After
      some time,
if she didn’t kill us first, we’d begin to cry like wolves ourselves.
 
Twenty-two people. Packed next to one another under two
      inverted boats
like notes in Bach’s “Come, Sweet Death, Come Blessed Rest,”
with more pauses, a dramatic suffocation between breaths.
A dry, calcic cough was a sign of life. Or the delirious mutterings
        of someone
dreaming aloud of “ice” in the middle of ice,
after they had cut off his toes.
 
But the hardest moment arrives in the morning,
when, with shut eyes and plugged nostrils,
as if drinking your own urine
you recycle the same lie for four months straight:
“Men, pack up your stuff! The boss might arrive today!”
 
And they obeyed me. Packed carefully each day from the start,
leaving nothing shap in the folds of their bags,
nothing that would spoil the line between fact and fiction.
 
It was a time when
routine grew more powerful than hope.
 
 
12.
Fish in the ocean toyed with our citizenship.
On the seventh mile, we left our medals behind, class ranks,
along with the dogs, potatoes, and a camera.
We made fire out of money
and kept only a single metal coin each
so that archaeologists might trace us more easily centuries later.
On Elephant Island, we had to bid farewell even to tobacco,
tobacco which reminded us of village alleyways
and walks home after midnight.
 
Time glided above us without touching a single strand of our
     hair—
nonexistent, as if gliding above ancient cities,
exposing the solemnity of our white bones
and crickets on absent walls.
 
That’s when the ten commandments deserted us:
“Do not steal,” “Do not lie,” “Do not covet,”
“Honor your parents”. . .
save one of them perhaps,
the one about the holiness of Sunday.
 
We already had nothing. We belonged to no one.
An entirely new species: HOMO ANTARCTICUS.
A scientific proof that “forgotten” and “free”
mean the same thing.
 
 
13.
Two years after returning from the world of the dead,
you find your house taken over by another tenant
and the rent tripled,
the commemorative plaque nailed to the gate:
“Here lived F.W.”
And your lover, or better, ex-lover,
for the same reason,
in the arms of another
three times more handsome.
 
You see your own image sold at an auction.
Artifact. Original. “Brrramp. Sold!” The price so high
you can’t afford it. But even if you could,
you're an illegal customer,
holding a death certificate in your hand.
 
And you find your parents turned into winter trees
their eyes fixed on a large cloud of plaster.
They don’t expect visitors. Best not disturb them.
Let their leaves fall quietly where they will
let the crow's nest remain in the armpit of a branch,
where it has always been.
 
Perhaps you should take a shortcut, start over.
Or you know what? There’s a war going on nearby, they say.
Go there instead!
But this time die better.
 
 
14.
War’s never satisfied with flesh;
Fresh, branded, smoked,
with or without blood
blue blood, dark, thick, whatever kind.
And frozen blood like yours
could store at minus 40 degrees Celsius,
viruses from 1914 unscathed,
and the map of the old Empire         
and Scott's hurt ego 
and old coins minted with the head of Edward VII,
and Browning’s poetry and the epic of the unknown,
like an envelope inside an envelope,
all making you the ideal candidate.
 
Back on the ship, ammunition everywhere,
sailing through the cold Northern seas
where you had to learn a new language.
A new language is like a fish:
first, you need to remove its spine
in order to chew it.
 
Unlike in Antarctica,
one’s purpose in war is clear: kill or be killed,
though sometimes it’s the same difference.
 
Baltic nights gave you what Antarctica refused you:
the other half of the celestial sphere.
You meet Vera, the widow of a tea plantation owner,
a character out of a Baroque novel, her pupils blurred with dusk,
and the ritual of mourning fitted perfectly to her body
like a final journey. 
 
 
15.
A man charmed by a glacier,
who knows too well the flawless forms of her body,
feels her eavesdropping gaze even when asleep,
her clean and distant breath
and her heart, a piece of ice, that melts inside a cigarette case
heated for drinking water,
finds it difficult to marry a real woman,
to marry Vera.
And Africa.
 
I bought land. Barren. Hundreds of acres. In Zululand.
I didn’t fare well with tobacco. Planted cotton instead,
chose bodily peace rather than meditation.
My nearest neighbor lived 45 miles away. White, of course.
And my fate, never blended with the blacks,
those beautiful statues, wrapped in straw.
I heard them nod off during lunch break,
like the oars of a boat,
in complete sync.
They knew where they were heading.
But I didn’t.
 
And I was right. It didn’t take long
before drought, floods, worms
destroyed everything. The bank left me only my own beard
and the malarial shadow of a baobab. Apart from other things,
Vera filled out divorce papers. The woman in the yellow dress,
yellow as quinine, yellow as the sigh of a hinge at dusk,
the woman married to the hero
who now can’t even manage a small plot of land.
 
 
16.
The man in front of me
—my master I call "Boss"—
is newly shaved, and dressed in a striped tie and jacket
as if the Prince of Wales or Fred Astaire,
a style that arrives here two years late.
He asks me to serve whiskey to clients at the bar
and chat them up
using their jargon, gestures,
sentences uninterrupted by mosquitoes,
and the abstract rhetoric of the Depression years.
And, to be frank,
he pays me for the latter.
 
But what do I know,
what does a survivor know about the art of living,
for which new instincts are needed, new muscles
and other kinds of heart valves?
 
Furthermore,
how can I obey such a spick-and-span boss,
having known the smoky gods of Antarctica
who recognize each other solely by the nose
and can end rebellions with a glance
and count the deaths as members of the crew?
How can I take orders from a boss whose name isn't Shackleton?
 
 
17.
"Second in command,” “Lieutenant,” “Shackleton’s right hand”
 
What did she see so clearly in me,
my drama teacher in elementary school
when she'd always assign me the role of Father Joseph,
of Gaspar the Magi offering Jesus frankincense,
or of John the Baptist always there to clear the path?
What did she see in my metallic pupils, baritone voice,
      infrequent speech
as if scissors, bandage, and iodine
inside a first aid kit?
 
Under Antarctica's naked sky, each of us followed his own star.
Even the carpenter, his own heraldic calling.
You didn’t need much to feed them;
 just a few crusts of insomnia and the tents' punctured holes.
 
My star was weak; you could hardly see it
hidden behind another larger, troubled star
like a calm valley that appears behind jagged peaks
more attractive when absent.
 
 
18.
What happened afterward can be told in a few words:
I worked in a mine; earth’s warm heart,
happened to be crueler than her frozen brain.
I laid railroad tracks South, always toward the Unknown.
It was like playing only two strings on a violin: joy and sorrow,
fatefully blending at the horizon.
 
I repaired houses. Another waste of time.
I never understood their weak points,
just as you can't make out eyes from genitals or mouth
in some underwater creatures.
 
And when I was left penniless,
I gave lectures about Antarctica,
water gurgling in my gullet every five words, for those few
who listened patiently to an adventure of survival.
 
Then Bea arrived. Or sweet Beatrice.
It was easy to grant her what I had left in my heart
—that set of heavy museum keys—
with no fear she might lose them.
 
Tired lungs and liver
could barely follow my split image
of bust and bottle of booze.
Like a prophet in the last circle of Dante’s Inferno,
I carried my own decapitated head in hand.
 
My ashes were lost at the base of a church. No one
      thought of them.
It was a time of war. Another world war. The second
one not knowing what to do with her own ashes either.
 
19.
Some of us died in the war.  Others took to the sea again,
the gray, cracked waters of the South,
decks perspiring fuel and alcohol.
Our random itineraries. Full-time melancholics.
 
For months in Antarctica,
we waited for our shadow to return
and consumed that question you ask yourself only once in your
     lifetime,
the way one consumes chickenpox.
 
And the rest of the time,
we counted the scars left on our faces,
with a gesture you could call indifferent and epic,
or childlike.
 
~~~
NONES
At three p.m.
under sky coming to harm
something too red flashes from a limb,
so red it hurts:
against sky coming apart,
against a left-out, twice-soaked shirt,
a cardinal
inflames the profane cathedral
of suburban yard its owner let fall
into disgrace.
How rain embarrasses
the half-pruned hedge. The half-mown grass
that sports a tonsure
in reverse shines under the torture.
Rain slicks with praise red shed, red feather.
Crested seedeater
out of character where
you’re neither the strictly monkish brown thrasher
nor the odd hermit thrush,
you scratch in the underbrush
of faith to see what you can flush:
a grub. A seed.Eminence not grise
but rouge, from your lipsticked beak
you pass a sowbug
to your mate. You peck at a slug
sliming your path, seeming to beg
your forgiveness.
To what would you confess
beyond season-to-season unfaithfulness?
VESPERS
There are more divine hours:
a gold-leafed page a mower
rows with a scythe as tall as the tower
that tents aloft
a tiny sky bereft
of cloud, a chapel ceiling left
unstarred, heaven
a lake turned upside down,
filled with an emptiness that’s clean
because it’s cold,
glacial enough to scald
the skin it bathed, the lungs it filled.
On devotion’s last page,
deep in the golden age
of illumination, the hunt’s cortège
has halted at the edge
of the known world, a clearing wedged
in a forest of spears. Red bird the badge
on the huntsman’s tunic,
you’re the splash of crimson lake,
the distant lordship’s flag, the cleric
dog’s bright collar,
its heretic tongue. It slavers
on the bleeding stag. Snarling at prayer
that chases belief,
it licks the offal of grief,
the heart cast aside reward enough.
~~~
And at the picnic table under the ancient elms, one of my parents turned to me and said: “We hope you end up here,”where the shade relieves the light, where we sit  in some beneficence—and I felt the shape of the finite  after my ether life: the ratio, in all dappling, of dark to bright; and yet how brief my stay would be under the trees, because the voice I’d heard could not cradle me, could no longer keep me in greenery; and I would have to say good-bye again, make my way across the white California sand and back: or am I now creating the helplessness I heard those words express, the psalm torn like a map in my hands?
~~~
I see it as it looked one afternoon In August,— by a fresh soft breeze o’erblown. The swiftness of the tide, the light thereon, A far-off sail, white as a crescent moon. The shining waters with pale currents strewn, The quiet fishing-smacks, the Eastern cove, The semi-circle of its dark, green grove. The luminous grasses, and the merry sun In the grave sky; the sparkle far and wide, Laughter of unseen children, cheerful chirp Of crickets, and low lisp of rippling tide, Light summer clouds fantastical as sleep  Changing unnoted while I gazed thereon. All these fair sounds and sights I made my own.
~~~
Along Ancona’s hills the shimmering heat,A tropic tide of air with ebb and flowBathes all the fields of wheat until they glowLike flashing seas of green, which toss and beatAround the vines. The poppies lithe and fleetSeem running, fiery torchmen, to and froTo mark the shore.
                   The farmer does not knowThat they are there. He walks with heavy feet,Counting the bread and wine by autumn’s gain,But I,—I smile to think that days remainPerhaps to me in which, though bread be sweetNo more, and red wine warm my blood in vain,I shall be glad remembering how the fleet,Lithe poppies ran like torchmen with the wheat.
~~~
Music, wind, someone’s car horn
Imagining to return
Buddha’s big toe on the lake
Your intricate gaze of form
Eating the lake like a word
Unzipped carefully by day
You walked it hesitantly
You taste something step by step•
Losing my way, wildly blue
Perhaps annotated past
The return gaze, my snowfall
My city gate firmly shut
Even to wonder how you’ve been
Isn’t what you want, therefore
Lightly enclosing my text
Cast down toward what I’ve not seen•
Happily a ceiling fan
You grasp the word sweltering
Days are tectonic, the sound
Of one memory spoken
Who waits for you at the lake’s
Wild edge? Bright glint of the noun
You knew dissatisfaction
Speaking even against time•
Recorded a length of time
I held memory tightly
Unoriginal dimming
Of  the light there, a found scene
Number three on the dirt path
Father carries his school bag
Without use for meter, yet
Both skies open to thunder•
Don’t speak to me of sorghum
Red fields, pressed up toward a sky
Whatever called to me there
Too wild, attempting a face
Old verses for my father
Dignify the cooling page
Black earth is the word it makes
Tilts forward, consequential
~~~
I’m overcome
by the cruelty
of nature
no I mean
I’m with
it. And each
little capacity
it has
can’t be transferred
I mean
a spruce
can’t give
its oils to you
can it.
But that’s how
it grows
in the ab
sence of
technology
my thoughts
grow. My thoughts
grow among
trees
but I don’t
help them
though
I’m for them.
I’m for my
dog & inci
dentally
I feed
her but I
don’t see
her much.
Joe does.
Joe is
my friend
& also
a dog father
I don’t
help mountains
Mountains
help me
I know
the planet
is old
& splashy
sleep helps
me. Time
helps
me. My mother
helped
me. And
now she
is gone. She
also hurt
me so it’s
good that
she’s gone.
I can grow
different
in the
day or
three decades
in which
I’ve got
left
I can
grow toward
the mountains
sit in solidarity
with prisoners
or go
to jail. I’m not joking
I can
push different.
I want
to say
something
about my cunt.
Because
that’s
what you
ask. But
I am
alone. No
mother
no phone
just a notebook
& a cunt
& my thoughts.
I don’t
even think
my thoughts.
You do.
~~~
Not one star, not even the half moon         
       on the night you were born
Not the flash of salmon
       nor ridges on blue snow
Not the flicker of raven’s
       never-still eye
Not breath frozen in fine hairs
       beading the bull moose’s nostril
Not one hand under flannel
       warming before reaching
Not burbot at home under Tanana ice
       not burbot pulled up into failing light
Not the knife blade honed, not the leather sheath
Not raw bawling in the dog yard
       when the musher barks gee
Not the gnawed ends of wrist-thick sticks
       mounded over beaver dens
Not solar flares scouring the earth over China
Not rime crystals bearding a sleek cheek of snow
Not six minutes more of darkness each day
Not air water food words touch
Not art
Not anything we expect
Not anything we expect to keep
Not anything we expect to keep us alive
Not the center of the sea
Not the birthplace of the waves
Not the compass too close to true north to guide us
Then with no warning
       flukes of three orcas
                 rise, arc clear of sea water
~~~
In the beginning, a word, move; then a plan and then the reasons, which I do not remember exactly. I remember clearly only the clothes we were given for the journey and the last, silent meal we ate. We left the place as lightly as we had come, so many years before. From a sunlit state of innocence where white sheets were hung to dry like clouds over paradise; from eucalyptus-scented earth, a red house with a yard swung between dreaming hills, pillaged by raccoons, framed with lilies like trumpets of the archangels, we moved: into history, a river slowed by many bends, a village of peacocks with a hundred eyes; a low house among fields, with an iron stove, a winter shrine; a fireplace blackened by time, the fragile bones of a sparrow frozen in the shape of its flight. When father played his trombone in the attic, schoolchildren tittered in the street. In the late afternoon, the cows assembled at the gate, witless, waiting for a farmer's son. Home, the children conjugated verbs, found variables and drew diagrams of the human heart. Evenings, the round kitchen table, lit by a low Dutch lamp, summoned poets, players, horsethieves, to glasses of jenever. An incense of gossip rose slowly, blackening the walls. Outside, horses pawed the darkness, breathing delicate feathers of ice. We courted the favors of spiders, mice and moles. Our words grew small and porous as fossiled bones, our gestures groaned with the cold. The will-less world of water, wood and stone taught us when to yield. When it came time to move along again, we were four strangers waving at each other, in slow motion, across a deafening expanse of ocean.
~~~
A little candlewax on the thumbnail, liquid
at first, slipping, then stalled to an ice-hood.
Another layer, another, and the child lies back,
his thumb a hummock, his small knuckle
buckled with cracks.
No snow yet, but
the last white meadows of switchwort and saxifrage
mimic it. Already the bears brush back
through the dwarf willows—Hubbart Point, Cape Henrietta Maria,
the bay's deep arc flattening, lessening
as land extends through the fast-ice and the seam
of open leads stretches, withdraws.
They have come for the pack floes, for the slow
rafting. And repeat on their white faces, the boy thinks,
the low strokes of the borealis: violet mouths,
madder blue at the eyelids. Perhaps he will walk
to the shoreline—no shore, of course, just miles
of land-fast ice stretched over water, stretched out
to water, the line where each begins
a filament, a vapor. By then the bears will be
sailors, or, far to the north, stalled in their waxy sleep.
He yawns, looks down at his slipper, his floormat
of braided fleece. By then the lights
will be thicker, greens and magentas flashing, rolling in
at times like fog. To go where nothing lives.
He turns, settles. To extend a little breath
out over that ice—the white, cumbersome bodies
migrating in reverse with the others, dragging
between them a lifeline, plump and intricate,
like a net, like purse seiners dragging a cork net,
its great arc spiraling, tighter, tighter,
now green in those lights, now blue, now
pink as the boy's ear,
where all night a line of cold
traces the rim, the lobe,
circles down, chills, and recedes.
~~~
I
Every day it is the same.
He comes home.
He tells her about it.
As he speaks, his breath condenses in front of his face.
She goes about her business;
every now and then she looks over.
She doesn’t hear his voice.
She sees the soft fog that continues to form a halo.
She knows he is still talking about that place.
He never tires of it like she does.
Only on summer days when the air is hot
and moisture is still a long time in coming,
she asks him to tell her about that place.
She sits facing him.
Waiting for the first vocalic, non-stops,
the push of air from his lips.
He tells her of the place where clouds are formed.
The cool dampness of his voice is rich.
Even on a dry June day
her face beads with wetness
as he talks directly to her.
Each aspirated sound a gentle burst of coolness.
“Tell me again, tell me again,” she teases.
If he knew she only wanted relief from the heat
and not the story, he would stop talking.
He begins, “The first time I saw the place
where clouds are formed was from
the window of a train . . .”
Another time was in a mirage
in the heat outside Tucson.
Once he thought he saw it
in the dry light of stars.
The place he remembers best
was when he saw it in the eyes
of a woman he spoke to.
When he first noticed it,
she hid it by lowering her gaze.
Soon she let him look freely.
There were times when she opened her eyes
wide, allowing an unobscured view.
Sometimes he saw her eyes smolder
with dryness on a summer day.
Other times she was rich with moisture.
Clouds came in succession.
The earth’s shadows muted.
“You know the forty days
and forty nights?
I was there.
I’ll be there when it happens again,”
she said with a slight smile.
Like a child, he rushed to look
into her eyes at every opportunity.
If he could, he would hang on her eye socket,
peering inside,
marveling at her displays.
II
An unusually cold December day right around Christmas;
clouds, mist find solace in the canyons of the Santa Catalina Mountains.
White moisture quietly moving amid the cactus.
Truly, clouds, wind, and rain are the few elements
that can touch the saguaro from head to foot.
Oblivious of spines, needles.
Rubbery hide surrounded, soothed by elements.
Contact triggers stored heat of remembered summers.
Moisture beads roll forward, unstoppable.
From the city below
we see mist rising, mist rising.
III
We sit close in the cab of the truck.
The weather is cold, wet outside.
Too messy to stand in
waiting for a school bus.
My father’s truck is warm inside,
having been at work since four a.m.
The sound of the engine is soothing,
heater working to capacity.
Inside the cab we are silent.
We don’t need language.
We listen to the regular hum of the engine,
rhythm of the windshield wipers,
soft rain on the hood.
Aware of the cold air
surrounding our temporary shelter.
We look out over the fields
where fog clings to the soil.
Every now and then
with the back of his gloved hand
he wipes the windshield.
“Is it coming yet?”
The three of us sit quietly,
breathing clouds.
Clouds condense as
they contact the coolness of the windows.
My father appears to breathe air
with temperature in balance.
He forms no clouds.
He watches us.
We continue to breathe
gray, soft mist, waiting for the school bus.
~~~
Some feel rain. Some feel the beetle startle
in its ghost-part when the bark
slips. Some feel musk. Asleep against
each other in the whiskey dark, scarcely there.
When it falls apart, some feel the moondark air
drop its motes to the patch-thick slopes of
snow. Tiny blinkings of ice from the oak,
a boot-beat that comes and goes, the line of prayer
you can follow from the dusking wind to the snowy owl
it carries. Some feel sunlight
well up in blood-vessels below the skin
and wish there had been less to lose.
Knowing how it could have been, pale maples
drowsing like a second sleep above our temperaments.
Do I imagine there is any place so safe it can’t be
snapped? Some feel the rivers shift,
blue veins through soil, as if the smokestacks were a long
dream of exhalation. The lynx lets its paws
skim the ground in snow and showers.
The wildflowers scatter in warm tints until
the second they are plucked. You can wait
to scrape the ankle-burrs, you can wait until Mercury
the early star underdraws the night and its blackest
districts. And wonder. Why others feel
through coal-thick night that deeply colored garnet
star. Why sparring and pins are all you have.
Why the earth cannot make its way towards you.
~~~
All this tall grass has ruined my gold
acrylic nails & I know something’s dead
just beyond my window. I grew up
with rats running my floorboards
& know the smell straining from a body
once caught in a trap. In the city
what little I have of an ass
is always out, a simple wind blow
from Marilyn Monroe-ing the street.
Here, in all this nature, there is nobody
but me & my 5 friends for a week
& I promised myself I’d be naked
but the first day I found a tick
clinging to my arm hair for dear
life & decided no way I’m exposing
my pussy to the elements. My love
for nature is like my love for most things:
fickle & theoretical.
Too many bugs & I want a divorce.
Last week, before I was here
my uncle drove me from our city
to the suburbs & sang “Project Chick”
in the car. When we parked
he asked me to take off my shoes
& there we walked, silent, barefoot
circling the lake, trying to not step
in goose shit.
He walked in front & I trailed behind
both our hands clasped behind our backs.    When you were my daughter,
    those were the happiest days of my life.
    I wish you would come home.
~~~
1
Desert heat, high clouds, and sky
the color of lapis. On this journey,
anything seems possible,
so we stop by an ancient cottonwood
to kiss. The beauty trembles,
doesn't say a word, just watches
me, so open. Small birds fly by, flock
in the shady tree above us. What
settles in her heart? What congeals?
Hope? Despair? Far off, the river churns
in its sandy banks, swallows veer, turn
in fiery air. Will these kisses seal
her to me? I her lover, she my wife?
Is all of this a dream, my whole life?
 
2
She is just this side of wonderful,
and suddenly the glamorous world
fills itself with shining and we laugh
at highway monuments that explain
how hard the trek had been for Franciscans
in the Indian wilderness, poor fellows—
conversion is the devil's own
work! Then the stones of her dream
turn up under her feet, the back
of a huge land turtle. I know
we must be circling Paradise
because the ants enter the fleshy petals
of the roadside flowers with evident
joy and purpose (oh, my dark, pretty one).
 
3
Music, my adored. When is there never
music? My accordion puffs up
with drinkable melodies. I spill
her tunes into your listening ear,
one after the other: the squeeze-box
enters the dance of the plaintive gypsy
with its hard rhythms, lilts the back-
breaking labor song the worker croons
to earth, warbles romantic notes of
dissolving borders. You melt
like a woman beneath her lover's touch.
Music is happy and pitiless when
it sets fire to combustible souls. Even
the raspy bandoneon's voice is lyric.
 
4
Sacred. Sacred. Sacred. Sacred. (Speak
in a whisper.) We slip into this
space half cognizant. The land is very
large indeed: bones of the earth
worn down, though she is a living thing.
See how she exposes her grace? Antelopes
graze on the far plain—their high,
white tails—the red soil throbs
its slow heartbeat, and the blue sky
clears so smartly, perfectly, like
radiance. Are the ancestors near?
What can we know? We decide
to wander around this prairie, mistaken
for Utes, buy commodities in little towns.
 
5
Late afternoon we head west along the willow-banked
Malheur after the long curve of the Snake River plain.
(Above the falls where the Shoshone went to pray
we soaked our feet in cold water, and I observed
the arch of her brown foot.) Rabbitbrush and sage
along the highway, juniper on far hills and bluffs.
Sundown, and dusk falls over the wide basin of land.
In Burns we eat eggs in a cafe, take a room
in the Motel 6. In the dark, I can see
her black hair, black against the pillows. Its clean
scent makes me think of corn. At dawn, I hold her
and there are kisses. Then more kisses. Then more.
The day is cold; a north wind blew last night. But
the land is open. Rain falls in showers of light.
 
6
Her hand on my thigh, my shoulder,
in my hair. She leans over to kiss my cheek.
We look at each other, smile. For miles
we travel this way, nearly silent, point
with eyes or chins at the circling hawk, the king-
fisher on the snag above the swollen
creek. One night I weep in her arms
as she cries, "Oh, oh, oh!" because I have touched
her scars lightly: throat, belly, breasts.
In that communion of lovers, thick sobs
break from me as I think of my love
back home, all that I have done
and cannot say. This is the first time
I have left her so completely, so alone.
 
~~~
Lyric night of the lingering Indian Summer,Shadowy fields that are scentless but full of singing, Never a bird, but the passionless chant of insects, 
    Ceaseless, insistent.  The grasshopper’s horn, and far-off, high in the maples, The wheel of a locust leisurely grinding the silence Under a moon waning and worn, broken, 
    Tired with summer.   Let me remember you, voices of little insects,Weeds in the moonlight, fields that are tangled with asters, Let me remember, soon will the winter be on us,
    Snow-hushed and heavy.  Over my soul murmur your mute benediction,While I gaze, O fields that rest after harvest,As those who part look long in the eyes they lean to, 
    Lest they forget them.
~~~
It was like climbing a mountain to those of us who’d climbed one. To the others, it was like, I suppose, something else. In other words, we let  everybody find her own figure of speech.
Not that it—speech—lay thick on the ground, or mountain; it presented itself one word at a time, far between. A body had to keep an eye out, like for firewood at dusk, or else
miss her chance. Nobody else, let’s face it, cared about metaphor, or even simile, the like-it-or-not-ness of the mountain pretty much getting  between a body and her musing, in its going. One
step at a time, anyone could lose herself or someone else just staring at her feet. And if a body meet a body is not mere speech but something that could happen, like hopping a bus—though on the mountain
you’ll catch no rides, worse luck, the mountain requires to be climbed on foot, one after the other, nothing else will get you up it. There’s nothing like such obduracy but in the wild, nobody can tell you otherwise. No simple figure,
this struggle: just a crag, your burden, and your own two feet. Say  otherwise, talk through your hat, which I don’t care for.
~~~
Some nights we feel the furred darknessof an ancient one's breath and are trappedin awakening, dismemberedby events we no longer recall.We can touch the windowsill,where October air gathersas hours slip past in thin robes,the forest a concert of voices.The last crickets let go of their songs.The land speaks, its language arisingfrom its own geography—the mountains' hulked shapesare blue whales, rememberingwhen they were undersea ridges,and rivers are serpentine strands hammered from silver, and dark treestalk to the wind—weaving mortal lives,drumbeats, pillars of smoke,voices wavering into updraft,the storyteller shifting the present.
~~~
Day and night, the lake dreams of sky.
A privacy as old as the mountains
And her up there, stuck among peaks. The whole eye
Fastened on hawk, gatherings of cloud or stars,
So little trespass. An airplane once
Crossed her brow; she searched but could not find
A face. Having lived with such strict beauty
She comes to know how the sun is nothing
But itself and the path it throws; the moon
A riddled stone. If only a hand
Would tremble along her cheek, would disturb. Even the elk
Pass by, drawn to the spill of creeks below—
How she cannot help abundance, even as it leaves
Her, as it sings all the way down the mountain.
~~~
The reservoir churned and cloud-deformed
The far line of hills, fused, bunched color
bitter wind against this hunch
my folded bones
I can see the rust earth beneath trees, the rough mats
       gathering weight in semi-darkness, dim
       nesting bases of trees
Graft of dark cloud upon lighter one behind, building up
       of something, a thickening, deposit of cold air, dark web
       of insistence, built up in me
How long can it be here?
A simmering of trees, a dark moiling
       a winter weight
       a mid-shimmering of heat-distorted things
The positioning of bolts of deep orange, gold-green and amber
       molded, wicked in together
Drops in pressure, now, a field of cold, a shift
       between rain and snow
The movement into this remembering
       of separate things, train sounding its horn, removing
       itself from the scene
Snow thickening the far bars of trees, graying them in
Blotting, dulling, gauzing over this dream
It is snowfalling, it is beauty-filling and cleansing
       this burn of words
       it is delivering something seeming to uplift and to begin
       pressing downward, this ink into frozen droplet
       this thing
Snow plinking in the leaves, the left hands of trees
       the neat levers and pulls
       the odd weeds
The rich fringe of emptying trees
       the shifted pins
the breaks into dense pines into period reeds into gutterings
What happens to the opposite shore
       is untenable
       is unmanageable to me
That stratagem of damage, that unmattering
Believe me it is some abomination of things being killed and
       that mattering to me
That exquisite built thing that is obliterated
       its tiny white amplitude, its singing crushed into
       particles, its must on the undersides of leaves
Now I am sure
       the world has not unfolded before me
       anymore but has closed into rows
       of its foldings
Something in the collections of those trees
       bare branches upthrust, the brush of them
       bare branches up-brushed
       their lip along mesh of shore weeds, the flanged grasses
       the scrim of their midst
       I am in them again
       meddling in darks that are in them
       and the white gold that is their outermost
       screen that is their leafleting their grief that is in me
       thin dredge of pebbles and
       strange glandular patternings of trees
       against trees against cut-bank against breath
The rubied lung of sumac
       tragedian
~~~
Toss in some wavy lines, an equal sign, and a squiggle,
then a lilac log, boulders with faces, a few phrases
like rock walls, twin marks from wagon wheels on granite.
The tell-tale lilacs give away the cellar hole:
magnetic lilacs, like nineteenth-century girls
in pinafores and blossom sprays, stationed
beside their no-longer houses. They look about to sing.
Banana curls. Purple ribbons tying their waists.
And boulders in the woods act as billboards
interrupted by an enormous Mont Blanc fountain pen, lounging
like an alligator. It intrudes. Comes out of my present
time. No. Be less. It's a Bic ballpoint. Bleached by deletion,
"By the middle of the nineteenth century, when de
forestation reached its peak, more than half
of New England's native forests"—according to Robert M. Thorson,Stone by Stone—"as much as 80 percent in the heavily settled
parts of southern New England—had been cut down,"
"replaced with 'open space,'" the autumn foliage
is paint-by-number and different tabs throughout
                   are half-finished murals
of a single type of tree in a single time of year.
Here's the place where someone w/ a pewter spoon kneeled
to plant the Lady's Slippers that still appear,
and the mushrooms like a stack of dinner plates
that run up the side of a rotting tree.
Here's the fallen-in deer stand
and the apple tree among maples making fruit for deer.
Outside the woods, the puff of dust on the road
where the school bus used to stop.
Outside is the failure to stay in touch
or, really, to ever be in touch. I didn't
ever know them (my neighbors) well.
In winter you are handed a white tray
with a few tiny rock walls, short lines drawn with a ruler,
an indent for where a cellar hole could be
a hyperlink to once go once more to the lake
and told to go at it, go play.
~~~
The bleached wood massed in bone piles,   
we pulled it from dark beach and built   
fire in a fenced clearing.
The posts’ blunt stubs sank down,
they circled and were roofed by milled   
lumber dragged at one time to the coast.   
We slept there.
Each morning the minus tide—
weeds flowed it like hair swimming.   
The starfish gripped rock, pastel,   
rough. Fish bones lay in sun.
Each noon the milk fog sank
from cloud cover, came in   
our clothes and held them   
tighter on us. Sea stacks   
stood and disappeared.
They came back when the sun
scrubbed out the inlet.
We went down to piles to get
mussels, I made my shirt
a bowl of mussel stones, carted
them to our grate where they smoked apart.   
I pulled the mussel lip bodies out,
chewed their squeak.
We went up the path for fresh water, berries.   
Hardly speaking, thinking.
During low tide we crossed   
to the island, climbed
its wet summit. The redfoots   
and pelicans dropped for fish.   
Oclets so silent fell
toward water with linked feet.
Jacynthe said little.
Long since we had spoken Nova Scotia,Michigan, and knew beauty in saying nothing.   
She told me about her mother
who would come at them with bread knives then   
stop herself, her face emptied.
I told her about me,
never lied. At night
at times the moon floated.   
We sat with arms tight   
watching flames spit, snap.   
On stone and sand picking up
wood shaped like a body, like a gull.
I ran barefoot not only
on beach but harsh gravels   
up through the woods.
I shit easy, covered my dropping.   
Some nights, no fires, we watched
sea pucker and get stabbed   
by the beacon
circling on Tatoosh.
2
I stripped and spread
on the sea lip, stretched   
to the slap of the foam   
and the vast red dulce.   
Jacynthe gripped the earth   
in her fists, opened—
the boil of the tide   
shuffled into her.
The beach revolved,
headlands behind us
put their pines in the sun.
Gulls turned a strong sky.
Their pained wings held,
they bit water quick, lifted.   
Their looping eyes continually   
measure the distance from us,   
bare women who do not touch.
Rocks drowsed, holes
filled with suds from a distance.
A deep laugh bounced in my flesh   
and sprayed her.
3
Flies crawled us,
Jacynthe crawled.
With her palms she
spread my calves, she
moved my heels from each other.   
A woman’s mouth is
not different, sand moved
wild beneath me, her long
hair wiped my legs, with women   
there is sucking, the water
slops our bodies. We come
clean, our clits beat like
twins to the loons rising up.
We are awake.
Snails sprinkle our gulps.   
Fish die in our grips, there is   
sand in the anus of dancing.   
Tatoosh Island
hardens in the distance.
We see its empty stones   
sticking out of the sea again.   
Jacynthe holds tinder
under fire to cook the night’s wood.If we had men I would make   
milk in me simply.
~~~
1.
In the windless late sunlight of August,
my father set fire to a globe of twine. At his back,
the harvested acres of bluegrass and timothy
rippled. I watched from a shallow hill
as the globe, chained to the flank of his pickup truck,
galloped and bucked down a yellow row, arced
at the fire trench, circled back,
arced again, the flames behind
sketching first a C, then closing to O—a word
or wreath, a flapping, slack-based heart,
gradually filling. To me at least. To the mare
beside me, my father dragged a gleaming fence,
some cinch-corral she might have known,
the way the walls moved rhythmically,
in and in. And to the crows, manic
on the thermals? A crescent of their planet,
gone to sudden sun. I watched one stutter
past the fence line, then settle
on a Hereford's tufted nape,
as if to peck some safer grain, as if
the red-cast back it rode
contained no transformations.
2.
A seepage, then, from the fire's edge: there
and there, the russet flood of rabbits.
Over the sounds of burning, their haunted calls
began, shrill and wavering, as if
their dormant voice strings
had tightened into threads of glass.
In an instant they were gone—the rabbits,
their voices—over the fire trench,
into the fallows. My father walked
near the burn line, waved up to me, and from
that wave, or the rippled film of heat,
I remembered our porch in an August wind,
how he stepped through the weathered doorway,
his hand outstretched with some
book-pressed flower, orchid or lily, withered
to a parchment brown. Here, he said, but
as he spoke it atomized before us—
pulp and stem, the pollened tongue,
dreadful in the dancing air.
3.
Scummed and boxcar thin,
six glass-walled houses stretched beside our fields.
Inside them, lilies, lilies—
a thousand shades of white, I think.
Eggshell, oyster, parchment, flax.
Far down the black-mulched beds, they seemed
ancestral to me, the fluted heads of
dowagers, their meaty, groping,
silent tongues. They seemed
to form perspective's chain:
cinder, bone, divinity. . .
4.
My father waved. The crows set down.
By evening, our fields took the texture
of freshened clay, a sleek
and water-bloated sheen, although no water
rested there—just heat and ash
united in a slick mirage. I crossed the fence line,
circled closer, the grasses all around me
collapsing into tufts of smoke. Then as I bent
I saw the shapes, rows and rows of tougher stems—
brittle, black, metallic wisps, like something grown
to echo grass. The soot was warm,
the sky held smoke in a jaundiced wing,
and as a breeze crossed slowly through,
stems glowed—then ebbed—
consecutively. And so revealed a kind of path,
and then a kind of journey.
~~~
In icy fields.
Is water flowing in the tank?
Will they huddle together, warm bodies pressing?
(Is it the year of the goat or the sheep?
Scholars debating Chinese zodiac,
follower or leader.)
O lead them to a warm corner,
little ones toward bulkier bodies.
Lead them to the brush, which cuts the icy wind.
Another frigid night swooping down — 
Aren’t you worried about them? I ask my friend,
who lives by herself on the ranch of goats,
far from here near the town of Ozona.
She shrugs, “Not really,
they know what to do. They’re goats.”
~~~
Or will we be lost forever?
In the silence of the last breath
Not taken
The blue sweep of your arm like a dancer
Clowning, in wrinkled pajamas,
Across the sky the abrupt
Brief zigzag of a jay...
All night the whiteness
And all day.
Once we have been lifted up
Into empty morning like ice
In the darkness of these white fields
Neither the ghost tracks of skis
Nor steel skates will wake us
Where are we looking for each other, separated
On the opposite hillside I see you
Miles away from me, a dot
Of faint color reddening, small bruised warmth
Opening its cranberry mouth and saying,
What are you saying?
                                        *
Under a cold blanket
An immense loneliness stretches
In every direction with no fences.
A few sticks tweak the crusted snow:
Thin remnants of an army
Of lost soldiers.
I see footsteps ahead of me but whose
And where will they lead me, parallel
Or converging? Is it not possible there will be one jet trail
That will not vanish,
Two phantom ribbons unfolding
That will not feather themselves away?
                                       *
Wrapped in our white parkas
In what shifting laminations, snowflakes
That mean nothing, transparent eyes spitting,
What glacier will we choose to lie on,
In what igloo rest
Barely breathing, in an air pocket
Just below the surface
Rustling beneath blizzards
Where is your foot, most beautiful
With blue toenails
I will be looking for it always
Wherever it is, next to me
In the darkness
Of rumpled white sheets,
Pale siftings, clouds
Sudden scarves of ourselves gusting
Loose, sandpapery as snow lifting
In what chill citadel of ice crystals
Will I find you?
~~~
The wooden scent of wagons,   the sweat of animals—these places   keep everything—breath of the cotton gin,   black damp floors of the icehouse.   Shadows the color of a mirror’s back   break across faces.  The luck   is always bad.  This light is brittle,   old pale hair kept in a letter.   The wheeze of porch swings and lopped gates   seeps from new mortar.   Wind from an axe that struck wood   a hundred years ago   lifts the thin flags of the town.   
~~~
You are smaller than I rememberAnd so is the house, set downhillAfloat in a sea of scrub oak. From up hereIt’s an ordinary box with gravelSpread over its lid, weighting it, butInside it’s full of shadows and sky.Clouds pull themselves over dryGrass, which, if  I’m not mistaken, will eruptAny minute in flame. Only A spark, a sunbeam focused. From up Here, enjoying the view, I can finally Take you in. Will you wave back? I keepSlingshotting around. There’s gravityFor you, but all I ever wanted was to fly.
~~~
1



			mudstone crumbs
			shell
			fragments
			finest sand
			tidal
			grind
			every day
			every
			night
			a medium of
			crawling
			life
			compressed
			baked
			lifted
			blown away


			salt
			marsh
			shallow
			soil
			shingle
			marram
			grass
			fescue
			grass
			tidal
			path
			creek
			of
			pollen
			falls
			in whispers


in the clay in the loam in the top of  the soil
in the sand in the molt of  the sea
in the light sand the light sound of shift in the swash
zone waves burrow for release
in the bend of  the body
I balance my current only takes me back
when seawards seawards is the call of my curve
& no turning
 
2
 

Two large cormorants flew rapidly and very low across the water heading directly towards Langstone Rock, where Dawlish Warren joins the coast just beyond the western edge of the Exe estuary. Their wing tips were almost touching the choppy water. This must have been about 7:45 on Friday morning; I was thirty yards or so out in the sea, only my head visible between the waves that the cormorants flew in among as they powered along one behind the other. I had come down the concrete lifeboat ramp and taken just a few steps on wet sand scattered with various shells, little gleaming stones, and scraps of seaweed, getting quickly into the cool water. The sky was piled up with dark gray cloud overhead but clear and bright at the horizon. The two birds passed close by and continued on their way indifferent to me watching them from the water and they gave no indication if they saw anything unusual. 

she swam 
only at night 
on the spring tides
in the silk light of water
slipping her over
the mud flats
when they studied why she did it
drifted far beyond her limits
though it made her vulnerable to prey
several theories came
but none swam
at night in a spring tide
in the silk light unsure
of itself
becoming only what is left
after breaking

 

3
 

herring gull
black-headed gull
arctic tern
oystercatcher
turnstone
sanderling
carrion crow
jackdaw
white wagtail
rock pipit
peregrine
kestrel
buzzard
brent goose
cormorant
kingfisher
farther out
gannet
stomach of fur
coughed up at low tide
stranded
snowfall of fur
dusting the mouth
sanded
out of this
worms fall
soft as whispers
coiling into faun-
ing “Aphrodita”
& out of her hair come the corpses
of a swallowed sea

 

4
 

mussel
shell
oyster shell
clam
shell
cockle shell
whelk
shell
limpet shell
winkle
shell
razor shell
crab shell
lobster
shell
prawn shell
sea
lettuce
she
              windblown sand
              seashell sand
              shifting sand
she
              sea sandwort
              sea rocket
              sea holly
she
               half sand
she both sea
               she half sea
she both sand
she is a both-formed thing
she
               wool sand
               cotton sand
               wood sand
she
               sea leather
               sea crystal
               sea skin
she
               half wool
she both skin
               she half skin
she both wool
she is a woollen skin
she
               asphalt soil
               nylon soil
               sandy soil
she
               landscape
               escape
               seascape
she half soil
               she both scape
she half scape
               she both soil
she escapes

 

5
 

And swimming my slow breast stroke out to the channel I saw a darkwinged butterfly come flying in above the waves, moving with the breeze, heading for the dunes. Was this a migrant painted lady, third generation, from Africa?
drifter           on the surface
upside           down dead
                       water
                       floater             upper                  sheltered
                           on the littoral fringe
                                                lower                  very sheltered
                            swimmer upward                 of hundreds    of thousands
                                                                             of hundreds    of thousands
of hundreds   of thousands   of hundreds   of thousands   of hundreds
       of thousands   of hundreds   of thousands   of hundreds   of
thousands        of hundreds        of thousands       of hundreds             of
thousands        of hundreds        of thousands       of hundreds             of
thousands        of hundreds        of thousands       of hundreds             of
thousands        of hundreds        of houses             of hundreds             of
houses of          of hundreds        of houses             of hundreds             of
houses of          of sands               of houses             of sand                      of
houses of          of sand                 of hums               of sand                      of
hums                 of sand                 of hum                 of sand                      of
humming
~~~
Well, friend, we’re here again —             sauntering the last half-mile to the land’s frayed endto ﬁnd what’s laid on for us, strewn across the turf — gull feathers, bleached shells,                                        a whole bull seal, bone-dry,knackered from the rut(we knock on his leathern head, but no one’s home).Change, change — that’s what the terns scream                                        down at their seaward rocks;ﬂeet clouds and salt kiss — everything else is provisional,                                        us and all our works.I guess that’s why we like it here:                         listen — a brief lull,                                        a rock pipit’s seed-small notes.
~~~
An inland sea – blue as a sapphire – set   Within a sparkling, emerald mountain chain    Where day and night fir-needles sift like rain Thro’ the voluptuous air. The soft winds fret The waves, and beat them wantonly to foam.    The golden distances across the sea    Are shot with rose and purple. Languorously The silver seabirds in wide circles roam. The sun drops slowly down the flaming West    And flings its rays across to set aglow    The islands rocking on the cool waves’ crest And the great glistening domes of snow on snow.    And thro’ the mist the Olympics flash and float    Like opals linked around a beating throat.
~~~
slant hand of beech leaves
shag of oaks before water
When did you go missing from me?
That passage between limb and slipped skin
gouged hickories, the ermine-bright birch
through all that is traveling slopeward
       circleting leaf through branch weave
       corymbs of curled leaves
       lone cedar document rising
Through trees that far land moves descant
the old rusts and pastes undershined
Don’t you ever think this is so strange?
the sibilant drift of dried leaves
the coming down all to some shambles
the encroachments on the innermost things
Don’t you feel how everything is strained beyond
       certain remembering?
The limbs break their fragile whisks into
The sky is a shroud pulled up over
Each leaf of the beech has its wisdom held fast
its little death ship
I cannot wake up from inside
       this burrow into fundaments of leaves
The cold drills down into the stone
the almost-extracted green
the bird cloaked up under the ribs
the dull gleams
~~~
I  Today I dissected a squid, the late acacia tossing its pollen across the black of the lab bench. In a few months the maples  will be bleeding. That was the thing:  there was no blood only textures of gills creased like satin,  suction cups as planets in rows. Be careful not to cut your finger
~~~
(i.m. Charles Leslie Stevenson, 1909-79)This House
Which represents you, as my bones do, waits,
all pores open, for the stun of snow. Which will come,
as it always does, between breaths, between nights
of no wind and days of the nulled sun.
And has to be welcome. All instinct wants to anticipate
faceless fields, a white road drawn
through dependent firs, the soldered glare of lakes.
Is it wanting you here to want the winter in?
I breathe you back into your square house and begin
to live here roundly. This year will be between,
not in, four seasons. Do you hear already the wet
rumble of thaw? Stones. Sky. Streams. Sun.
Those might be swallows at the edge of sight
returning to last year's nest in the crook of the porchlight.Complaint
'Dear God,' they write, 'that was a selfish winter
to lean so long, unfairly on the spring!'
And now — this too much greed of seedy summer.
Mouths of the flowers unstick themselves and sting
the bees with irresistible dust. Iris
allow undignified inspection. Plain waste
weeds dress up in Queen Anne's lace. Our mist-
blue sky clouds heavily with clematis.
'Too much,' they cry, 'too much. Begin again.'
The Lord, himself a casualty of weather
falls to earth in large hot drops of rain.
The dry loam rouses in his scent, and under
him — moist, sweet, discriminate — the spring.
Thunder. Lightning. He can do anything.Between
The wet and weight of this half-born English winter
is not the weather of those fragmentary half-true willows
that break in the glass of the canal behind our rudder
as water arrives in our wake — a travelling arrow
of now, of now, of now. Leaves of the water
furl back from our prow, and as the pinnate narrow
seam of where we are drives through the mirror
of where we have to be, alder and willow
double crookedly, reverse, assume a power
to bud out tentatively in gold and yellow,
so it looks as if what should be end of summer —
seeds, dead nettles, berries, naked boughs —
is really the anxious clouding of first spring.
...'Real' is what water is imagining.Stasis
Before the leaves change, light transforms these lucid
speaking trees. The heavy drench of August
alters, things; its rich and sappy blood
relaxes where a thirst ago, no rest
released the roots' wet greed or stemmed their mad
need to be more. September is the wisest
time — neither the unbearable burning word
nor the form of it, cooped in its cold ghost.
How are they sombre — that unpicked apple, red,
undisturbed by its fall; calm of those wasp-bored amethyst
plums on the polished table? Body and head
easy in amity, a beam between that must,
unbalanced, quicken or kill, make new or dead
whatever these voices are that hate the dust.The Circle
It is imagination's white face remembers
snow, its shape, a fluted shell on shoot
or flower, its weight, the permanence of winter
pitched against the sun's absolute root.
All March is shambles, shards. Yet no amber
chestnut, Indian, burnished by its tent
cuts to a cleaner centre or keeps summer
safer in its sleep. Ghost be content.
You died in March when white air hurt the maples.
Birches knelt under ice. Roads forgot
their ways in aisles of frost. There were no petals.
Face, white face, you are snow in the green hills.
High stones complete your circle where trees start.
Granite and ice are colours of the heart.
~~~
Scarred hemlock roots, Oaks in mail, and willow-shoots     Spring’s first-knighted; Clinging aspens grouped between, Slender, misty-green,     Faintly affrighted: Far hills behind, Somber growth, with sunlight lined,     On their edges; Banks hemmed in with maiden-hair, And the straight and fair     Phalanx of sedges: Wee wings and eyes, Wild blue gemmy dragon-flies,     Fearless rangers; Drowsy turtles in a tribe Diving, with a gibe     Muttered at strangers; Wren, bobolink, Robin, at the grassy brink;     Great frogs jesting; And the beetle, for no grief Half-across his leaf     Sighing and resting; In the keel’s way, Unwithdrawing bream at play,     Till from branches Chestnut-blossoms, loosed aloft, Graze them with their soft     Full avalanches! This is very odd! Boldly sings the river-god:     ‘Pilgrim rowing! From the Hyperborean air Wherefore, and O where     Should man be going?’ Slave to a dream, Me no urgings and no theme     Can embolden; Now no more the oars swing back, Drip, dip, till black     Waters froth golden. Musketaquid! I have loved thee, all unbid,     Earliest, longest; Thou hast taught me thine own thrift: Here I sit, and drift     Where the wind’s strongest. If, furthermore, There be any pact ashore,     I forget it! If, upon a busy day Beauty make delay,     Once over, let it! Only, — despite Thee, who wouldst unnerve me quite     Like a craven,— Best the current be not so, Heart and I must row     Into our haven!
~~~
Nobody in the lane, and nothing, nothing but blackberries,   
Blackberries on either side, though on the right mainly,
A blackberry alley, going down in hooks, and a sea
Somewhere at the end of it, heaving. Blackberries
Big as the ball of my thumb, and dumb as eyes
Ebon in the hedges, fat
With blue-red juices. These they squander on my fingers.
I had not asked for such a blood sisterhood; they must love me.
They accommodate themselves to my milkbottle, flattening their sides.
Overhead go the choughs in black, cacophonous flocks—
Bits of burnt paper wheeling in a blown sky.
Theirs is the only voice, protesting, protesting.
I do not think the sea will appear at all.
The high, green meadows are glowing, as if lit from within.
I come to one bush of berries so ripe it is a bush of flies,
Hanging their bluegreen bellies and their wing panes in a Chinese screen.
The honey-feast of the berries has stunned them; they believe in heaven.   
One more hook, and the berries and bushes end.
The only thing to come now is the sea.
From between two hills a sudden wind funnels at me,   
Slapping its phantom laundry in my face.
These hills are too green and sweet to have tasted salt.
I follow the sheep path between them. A last hook brings me   
To the hills’ northern face, and the face is orange rock   
That looks out on nothing, nothing but a great space   
Of white and pewter lights, and a din like silversmiths   
Beating and beating at an intractable metal.
~~~
We came so trustingly, for love, but these   
Lowlands, flatlands, near beneath the sea   
Point with their cautionary bones of sand   
To exorcize, submerge us; we stay free   
Only as mermaids glittering in the waves:   
Mermaids of the imagination, young   
A spring ago, who know our loveliness   
Banished, like fireflies at winter’s breath,   
Because none saw; these vines about our necks   
We placed in welcome once, but now as wreath   
Against the scalpel cold; still cold creeps in   
To grow like ivy over our chilling bodies   
Into our blood. Now in our diamond dress   
We wive only the sequins of the sea.   
The lowlands have rejected us. They lie   
Athwart the whispering waters like a scar   
On a mirage of glass; the dooming land,   
Where nothing can take root but frost, has won.   
And what of warmth and what of joy? They are   
Sequestered elsewhere, southward, where the sun   
Speaks. For all our mermaid vigilance   
And balance, all goes under; underneath   
The land’s gray wave we falter and fall back   
To hibernate within the caves of death.
~~~
My memory of a perfect scent: pine, sage, and cypress;
My friends' faith in the power of rough and winding paths
to take me up a mountain and bring me back.
Specimens plucked from that mountain's pastures:
Indian paintbrush, sego lily, ordinary wildflowers.
How I got them is a story of friendship and passion
Nancy, now a doctor, once a shy sophmore in college
Her husband Mike, the second, better one, and their obsession
with the Great Outdoors—hence an Idaho address.
Boise's Northend is a throwback to neighborhoods American—nice
               homes
Next to two-story garden apartments down the street from a 
               mansion.
Bikes and dogs and hand-pushed lawn mowers.
Where they dwell is a bungalow that spirits Memphis, Tennessee
circa 1971:
The Who blasting off a turntable, marijuana-scented air, boys with
              long hair,
girls wearing their boyfriends' blue jeans, bourbon and acid.
Paperbacks, record albums, text books piled up—azaleas on the
              parkway;
a howl of buzzing bees late spring just before graduation.
Their bungalow has dueling computers and a real backyard.
While Nancy and Mike's boxes are slowly being unpacked,
Their bicycles are carefully racked inside their front door.
Everyone is a thief out West. If you leave your bikes on the porch
They disappear. If you find water, someone else will divert it.
There are those who fight about the wind. Others the sun.
All angling for rights—mineral, water, air—that only comes with
              political power.
Oh, my friends who love to hike, to ski, to bike and me, they love
Are driving me from Boise to Ketchum through mountain and 
               valley beauty.
High desert heat is clear, dry and when your body rises out of  a 
             chilly car,
BLAM.
From there you enter another air conditioning zone:
a general store at the edge of mountain lore.
This place has everything from Bibles to good bourbon.
I almost bought a foot long sausage. I almost bought a gun.
I did buy cowboy postcards, mostly made for fun.
Food and security. Winter just over the ridge, four weeks hence.
I used to watch Death Valley Days.
Death was hinted, but not shown—the wagon turned over,
The wagon train a going.
O, those long-suffering white people fearful of Indians and scared of
             bandits,
desperate for shade, for water, for land flowing milk and honey.
Hard-bitten men and sad-eyed women trekking.
How grand those verdant acres were to be.
What they got was land just green enough for wandering herds of
             long-horned beasts
and no where to farm, no where to hide.
Today, the wind machines whip around:                         BIG ENERGY.
Horses gambol and graze on that patch of land or this keen slope.
No wheat and corn, not even dope grows here.
But silver, gold, treasures unknown lode these mountains
inviting speculation, misery, and bad legislation.
A few miles up from Sun Valley, we enter a trail.
Mike and Nancy smile and cajole.
Straw hat and baseball cap attest to sun's plenty.
Their walking sticks to the rocks' ready
challenge to ankles and limbs.
Our water pouches are overflowing.
What were my friends thinking?
We slip and slide on the side of this mountain and step aside
for the sculpted women in tank tops and biker shorts—trotting as
               fast as
Nancy and Mike's favorite dog
She runs ahead following the blonde beauties until all is shadow.
We greet each other with glee.
I am the novice hiker. I am afraid of falling into thin air.
One large Black woman with a bum knee. What were they
             thinking?
She will love the smell. Pine, sage, and cypress.
She will love the sound. Wind shakes aspens. Water crinkles rock
She will love the sight. Wildflowers—whites, yellows, purples and
               reds:
Indian paintbrush, sego lily, the wily cinquefoil.
When friends give you what you need, what more can you ask?
Oh the pleasure in a mountain's power to quiet a panicked heart.
The glade refined.
Hawk's home, wolf's dream, bears far away.
Stewards of American beauty—these are the paths my friends make
               in wild places
—the rise and fall of future walks.
I salute their obsession for Idaho's red undulating hills.
Whose mountain ranges east to west like those in the Himalayas
says a guidebook, but ours is a different story—in this young
              mountain,
on these new hills, circumspect is the American West.
Where people steal
a drop of ore,
a native flower,
a piece of splendor
day in and day out.
~~~
There is a man
who circles the perimeter
with a baby in his arms
unmoving.
Locusts burn
with the silhouettes
of saints at dusk.
Saints are in the cloud.
We are in a dry storm.
The man extends his circles
pulling the baby through
the cactus scrub.
Look at his melting trainers
in the heat,
they aren’t what he asked for.
There are black leather skids
on the dry stone wall.
People in black cloaks run
out of the corner of your eye.
A pig turns on a spit.
The prairie is a terrarium for the blaze
but the edge is dry of fire.
It is the height of one season,
bushes burn.
A burnt five-year-old
without eyelids
turns quick cartwheels
through the heat wave
under the big pale sky,
black and blue.
~~~
Leaves drift from the cemetery oaks onto late grass,   Sun-singed, smelling like straw, the insides of old barns.   The stone angel's prayer is uninterrupted by the sleeping   Vagrant at her feet, the lone squirrel, furtive amid the litter.   Someone once said my great-grandmother, on the day she died,   rose from her bed where she had lain, paralyzed and mute   For two years following a stroke, and dressed herself—the good   Sunday dress of black crepe, cotton stockings, sensible, lace-up shoes.   I imagine her coiling her long white braid in the silent house,   Lying back down on top of the quilt and folding her hands,   Satisfied.   I imagine her born-again daughters, brought up    In that tent-revival religion, called in from kitchens and fields   To stand dismayed by her bed like the sisters of Lazarus,   Waiting for her to breathe, to rise again and tell them what to do.   Here, no cross escapes the erosion of age, no voice breaks   The silence; the only certainty in the crow's flight   Or the sun's measured descent is the coming of winter.   Even the angel's outstretched arms offer only a formulated   Grace, her blind blessings as indiscriminate as acorns,   Falling on each of us, the departed and the leaving.
~~~
From this heightthe sunset spans the whole worldbefore me: houses and trees are shadowsneon flares between them like sudden firethe freeways run, alwaysstrangely vacant with riderless carsempty airthe windows up hererefract the blue slate and rose lightmaking the hills on the horizon collidewith ideas of Sussex, piedmontor the cold clear wind of the Abruzzibut that is never what is out there.At home, the lamp curls its aurorainto the corners of the roomand out the windowssquares, rectangles of lightstake out a territory on the ragged lawn.In the center of thingsbetween the pressing of the window and air— a small space —there is a meeting that definesnothing, everything.
~~~
So here are the strange feelings that flicker
in you or anchor like weights in your eyes.
Turn back and you might undo them,
the way trees seem to float
free of themselves as they root.
A swan can hold itself on the gray ice water
and not waver, an open note upon which minor chords
blur and rest. But it was born dark.
The shore of that lake is littered with glass.
How you came to be who you are
was all unwinding, aimless on a bike,
off to retrieve a parcel that could only be a gift,
and felt, as a child, the sea
weave around your feet, white light rushing in with the surf.
What lived there?
 
                              —Joy, dispatched from nowhere,
and no need to think about your purpose,
and no fear that the sun gliding down
might burn the earth it feeds. Black habitat of now
in which decimation looks tender.
Sometimes the call of a bird is so clear
it bruises my hands. At night, behind glass,
light empties out then fills a room and the people in it,
hovering around a fire, gorgeous shapes of wind
leaning close to each other in laughter.
From this distance, they are a grace,
an ache. The kingdom inside.
~~~
He wants to take her
where birds grew legs
long as rodeos,
and a reimagined giant
wombat tends to disappoint.
He wants to drive her to a desert
where they ghosted her in ochre,
buried her, standing upright
by a milky singing lake.
He wants to walk with her
along a curve of shattered moon,
where human memory
unmade her long ago.
He wants to wake
where sand blows yesterday
from her face —
where there is nothing
but the terror of  his faith.
~~~
It sifts from Leaden Sieves -
It powders all the Wood.
It fills with Alabaster Wool
The Wrinkles of the Road -
It makes an even Face
Of Mountain, and of Plain -
Unbroken Forehead from the East
Unto the East again -
It reaches to the Fence -
It wraps it Rail by Rail
Till it is lost in Fleeces -
It deals Celestial Vail
To Stump, and Stack - and Stem -
A Summer’s empty Room -
Acres of Joints, where Harvests were,
Recordless, but for them -
It Ruffles Wrists of Posts
As Ankles of a Queen -
Then stills it’s Artisans - like Ghosts -
Denying they have been -
~~~
Colin, why this mistake?
 Why plead thy foolish love?My heart shall sooner break
 Than I a minion prove;Nor care I half a rush,
 No snare I spread for thee:Go home, my friend, and blush
 For love and liberty.Remembrance is my own —
 Dominion bright and clear,Truth there was ever known
 To combat every care:One image there impressed
 Through life shall ever beWhilst my innocuous breast
 Owns love of liberty.I ever taught thee how
 To prize the soul entire,When on the mountain’s brow
 I turned my rural lyre:Thou servile art and vain,
 Thy love unworthy me!Away! nor hear my strain,
 Of love or liberty.What arts need I display
 To woo a soul like thine?Thou ne’re canst know the way
 My memory to confine;For my eternal plan
 Is to be calm and free.Estranged from tyrant man
 I’ll keep my liberty.Yon woods their foliage wear,
 Be thou away or nigh;The warblers of the year
 Instruct me not to sigh:My tears ne’er roll the steep,
 Nor swell the restless sea,Except for those who sleep
 Bereft of liberty.Slave to commanding eyes!
 Those eyes thou wouldst commendMy judgment must despise —
 My pity is thy friend:If eyes alone can move
 A swain so dull as thee,They mean but to reprove
 Thy loss of liberty.I stray o’er rocks and fields
 Where native beauties shine:All fettered fancy yields
 Be, Colin, ever thine.Complain no more! but rove —
 My cheek from crimson free,Within my native grove
 I’ll guard my liberty.
~~~
If walking, like wine, only abets a sad mood
let’s try it, I said, and I did:
over these hills that have never known sorrow
no thoughtful moon passes. Dig until a hill is level, and unearth
only earth. Take pride in knowing the chemical makeup
of rain, the sum total of harmful vapors in any sunset.
For if you must drag in the old lines
about suicidal willows, star’s stacked for or against you,
you clutter a limitless, soaring landscape
with your own baggage. Night of love,
day of omens of night, great mountain
of realized hopes, valley where bitter winds
blow the dispossessed into raving lunatics—
what are they but shady projections
of passing whims, vastly oversimplified versions
of something infinitely greater? This vision before you
is nothing but a triad of trees, hills, river,
steadfast and eternal. But soon you start to feel restless
and when, setting out to take a roll of photos,
you note the disturbing absence of a road,
your suavity crumbles: you deafen the sky
and serenade the moon, fall prostrate before pines
saying oh, come back, spirit of the place which,
lifeless without you, blossoms into something
sumptuously more than mediating madness;
come back, massive oaks that await our coming;
to carve initials is to be truly human;
the days are dappled with our passions,
the mountains rise and fall with our glories and follies.
~~~
Toward what island-home am I moving,not wanting to marry, not wanting too much of that emptiness at evening, as when I walked through a field at duskand felt wide in the night.And it was again the evening that drew meback to the field where I was most alone,compassed by stems and ruts, no light of the fixed stars, no flashing in the eyes, only heather pared by dry air, shedding a small feathered radiance when I looked away,an expanse whose deep sleep seemed an unending warren I had been given, to carry out such tasks—that I might find nothing dead.  And it was again the evening that drew meback to the field where I could sense no boundary—the smell of dry earth, cool arch of my neck, the darkness entirely within myself.  And when I shut my eyes there was no one.Only weeds in drifts of stillness, only stalks and gliding sky.Come, black anchor, let us not be harmed.The deer leafing in the dark.The old man at the table, unable to remember.The children whose hunger is just hunger, and never desire.
~~~
The unsympathetic wind, how she has evaded me for years now,
leaving a guileless shell and no way to navigate. Once when I stood
on a plateau of earth just at the moment before the dangerous,
jutting peaks converged upon the lilting sway of grasslands, I almost
found a way back. There, the sky, quite possibly all the elements,
caused the rock and soil and vegetation to congregate. Their prayer
was not new and so faint I could hardly discern. Simple remembrances,
like a tiny, syncopated chorus calling everyone home: across
a thousand eastward miles, and what little wind was left at my back.
But I could not move. And then the music was gone.
All that was left were the spring time faces of mountains, gazing down,
their last patches of snow, luminous. I dreamed of becoming snow melt,
gliding down the slope and in to the valley. With the promise,
an assurance, that there is always a way to become bird, tree, water again.
~~~
My father’s farm is an apple blossomer.
He keeps his hills in dandelion carpet
and weaves a lane of lilacs between the rose
and the jack-in-the-pulpits.
His sleek cows ripple in the pastures.
The dog and purple iris
keep watch at the garden’s end.
His farm is rolling thunder,
a lightning bolt on the horizon.
His crops suck rain from the sky
and swallow the smoldering sun.
His fields are oceans of heat,
where waves of gold
beat the burning shore.
A red fox
pauses under the birch trees,
a shadow is in the river’s bend.
When the hawk circles the land,
my father’s grainfields whirl beneath it.
Owls gather together to sing in his woods,
and the deer run his golden meadow.
My father’s farm is an icicle,
a hillside of white powder.
He parts the snowy sea,
and smooths away the valleys.
He cultivates his rows of starlight
and drags the crescent moon
through dark unfurrowed fields.
~~~
chains of the willow, desolate weft
birds and the slim reprieves
the socketing together of weeds before water
straight-pins of jet
incontrovertible smears of dense cloud
       against bullet-train whitenings, unleashed
the reductions to tense
the awful dozes into deep sinks
flush grows upward, secreting, soaking through
       the old damasks
fretwork of trees, their balances achieved
       then slipped off
touched-up surge of cloud across water
The river shuttles onward, reconstituting
It gains the red threads of taillights
the spare greens and the thousand paired whites
       warping over, shaping off
The ducks come forth out of something unclear
The trees drain their weights into water
The ducks are a tension I have not known of
How they pivot, disfiguring the whole field
dragging their trapezoid blear
They are careful and meet their trains behind them like brides
Now the whistles of those taken to air
The disturbance of them in this river
       and the wavering cardiographies
       up-rushed, up-stayed
This is the push of all strayed things into night
the heavying of trees against sky-fire
       stolen into a river, cloistered down
I do not want anything more than this taking
       of last light into pocketings and loose garments
       unbearable closets of the trees
       the stitched-in bones and the placketings
This feeling of everything unhanded
       suddenly let go into robes
The half-bustled willow rails forward
The still surface. The quieted surface.
The same sharp planets exacting there
~~~
abide with me
don’t ever abide
gimme anytime a pile
of leaf-hay across
the field underneath
the bright new blue
tractor pulling the tedder
which is the waffler or fluffer
~~~
On thy stupendous summit, rock sublime! That o’er the channel reared, half way at sea The mariner at early morning hails, I would recline; while Fancy should go forth, And represent the strange and awful hour Of vast concussion; when the Omnipotent Stretched forth his arm, and rent the solid hills, Bidding the impetuous main flood rush between The rifted shores, and from the continent Eternally divided this green isle. Imperial lord of the high southern coast! From thy projecting head-land I would mark Far in the east the shades of night disperse, Melting and thinned, as from the dark blue wave Emerging, brilliant rays of arrowy light Dart from the horizon; when the glorious sun Just lifts above it his resplendent orb. Advances now, with feathery silver touched, The rippling tide of flood; glisten the sands, While, inmates of the chalky clefts that scar Thy sides precipitous, with shrill harsh cry, Their white wings glancing in the level beam, The terns, and gulls, and tarrocks, seek their food, And thy rough hollows echo to the voice Of the gray choughs, and ever restless daws, With clamor, not unlike the chiding hounds, While the lone shepherd, and his baying dog, Drive to thy turfy crest his bleating flock. The high meridian of the day is past, And Ocean now, reflecting the calm Heaven, Is of cerulean hue; and murmurs low The tide of ebb, upon the level sands. The sloop, her angular canvas shifting still, Catches the light and variable airs That but a little crisp the summer sea, Dimpling its tranquil surface. 
~~~
In the northwest corner of Dakota, I saw a room someone had left, a plush sofa returning its button-eyed stare to the glance she gave it over her shoulder, the dog, too, turning. In the next room, the mattress,with mattress stories one after another tumbling out of each spring, the window she opened first thing, its vista of mile after mile, and the windmill hauling its load. 
               I saw that, and nothing alive—green oil-figured linoleum laid on counters,nails of bad craft, the ripped blackening edge that scared her more than the bed and the sound of the windmill winning its will from the aquifer night after night, the whack of her blade on the block. There are houses with too many knives sometimes she said, but when June ferned its way in she'd relent, take on its restraint, heave again on the stained sheets her burden of child, herself a torn girl again, combing her hair through fingers bruised by corn shocks, sweet juice in the cuts of her life.
                                        She began to think of the border and mustangs without brand. At night they'd bend over the bed and nuzzle. One ride was enough. She had sufficient magic to cling to a mane and fare over the windowsill. I see where the curtain fell and nobody mended the tear, I see where bare feet marked like fossils her pass in the rain.When he uncovers fiddleheads by the spring,why does he always think of that first sight of her thigh in the peach-colored dress, of his hand'ssearching moss with its red-gold stamens, the spring in that arid landscape like something from Canaan under his tongue? Even in old age he'd ponder the moment,lying under the moon forgiving himself, her, the world that bred their conundrum, washed in that rain.
~~~
         i. Spring
the tips of each pine
the spikes of telephone poles
hold gathering crows
may’s errant mustard
spreads wild across paved road
look both ways
roadside treble cleft
feeding gopher, paws to mouth
cheeks puffed with music
yesterday’s spring wind
ruffling the grey tips of fur
rabbit dandelion
         ii. Summer
turkey vulture feeds
mechanical as a red oil rig
head rocks down up down
stiff-legged dog rises
goes grumbling after squirrel
old ears still flap
snowy egret—curves,
lines, sculpted against pond blue;
white clouds against sky
banded headed bird
this ballerina killdeer
dance on point my heart
         iii. Fall
leaf wind cold through coat
wails over hills, through barren trees
empty garbage cans dance
damp September night
lone farmer, lighted tractor
drive memory’s worn path
sky black with migration
flocks settle on barren trees
leaf birds, travel songs
october moon cast
over corn, lighted fields
crinkled sheaves of white
         iv. Winter
ground painted in frost
thirsty morning sun drinks white
leaves rust golds return
winter bare branches
hold tattered cups of summer
empty nests trail twigs
lace edges of ice
manna against darkened sky
words turn with weather
now one to seven
deer or haiku syllables
weave through winter trees
Northern follows jig
body flashes with strike, dive:
broken line floats up.
~~~
In a drawer I found a map of the world,
folded into eighths and then once again
and each country bore the wrong name because
the map of the world is an orphanage.
The edges of the earth had a margin
as frayed as the hem of the falling night
and a crease moved down toward the center of
the earth, halving the identical stars.
Every river ran with its thin blue
brother out from the heart of a country:
there cedars twisted toward the southern sky
and reeds plumed eastward like an augur’s pens.
No dates on the wrinkles of that broad face,
no slow grinding of mountains and sand, for—
all at once, like a knife on a whetstone—
the map of the world spoke in snakes and tongues.
The hard-topped roads of the western suburbs
and the distant lights of the capitol
each pull away from the yellowed beaches
and step into the lost sea of daybreak.
The map of the world is a canvas turning
away from the painter’s ink-stained hands
while the pigments cake in their little glass
jars and the brushes grow stiff with forgetting.
There is no model, shy and half-undressed,
no open window and flickering lamp,
yet someone has left this sealed blue letter,
this gypsy’s bandana on the darkening
Table, each corner held down by a conch
shell. What does the body remember at
dusk? That the palms of the hands are a map
of the world, erased and drawn again and
Again, then covered with rivers and earth.
 
~~~
There's a place between two stands of trees where the grass grows uphill
and the old revolutionary road breaks off into shadows
near a meeting-house abandoned by the persecuted
who disappeared into those shadows.
I've walked there picking mushrooms at the edge of dread, but don't be fooled
this isn't a Russian poem, this is not somewhere else but here,
our country moving closer to its own truth and dread,
its own ways of making people disappear.
I won't tell you where the place is, the dark mesh of the woods
meeting the unmarked strip of light—
ghost-ridden crossroads, leafmold paradise:
I know already who wants to buy it, sell it, make it disappear.
And I won't tell you where it is, so why do I tell you
anything? Because you still listen, because in times like these
to have you listen at all, it's necessary
to talk about trees.
~~~
And if all those who meet or even
hear of you become witness to what you are—
a white country of blight beneath the last snows of
spring. Could we remain quiet on earth
and bear it, the war we make inside
what is—it’s a long time to be here, to be still,
to feel the rot inside now—bone-scrap, char, sheets of stars
at the edge of a field where we are once again
taken from ourselves. Could we remain here,
witness to grief, one last bright dire call-and-reply,
each birdsong or siren extinguished where some
trueness abides, some portion we have lost our right
to claim or know. It comes into any mind that would
perceive it, leaf-rot, speech-rot, the deliberate ribcage
of the deer, these abrupt chalk cliffs over which
the confused animals fling themselves, and you,
obscure, receive no response that is not suffered
as the days grow long and distortions
come to seem the natural course of things—
what trees whose creatures stray into space—
and they find they cannot land though the eyelid
struggles open—no answer, no resolution—
a window opened to the mute green world,
weedy and driftless, a wind drilling rain, dirt,
the parameters of uncertainty, of hope,
what we might be against what we have done,
bees crawling through the lips of the one
who would say the earth turned into sour flesh—
What strange rooms, what soundless movement of sky
over desert where the flesh again is beaten
and the emptiness extends itself while some old man
looks on, a raptor in waiting, the sand-field
around them blown thinly toward sun—no longer
ourselves in the afternoons, evenings,
weak, vague, clutched at the mouth—
because we did nothing, because we lost count.
~~~
You slow down to watch cumulus clouds stream across the
sky. You choose a more circuitous route home and pass a
tree with white bags tied around random apples. The apples
remind you of clouds, how each hangs in the sky, singular
yet part of a flock. Each item in the flock is a coordinate of
earth and sky, enumerating space. The flocks of apples and
clouds are actual infinities, an endless collection of discrete
items that one can conceivably count to the end. This is
different from potential infinity, which is the entirety of
infinity, an immeasurable continuum that is greater than the
sum of its parts. After your first glimpse, you are lonely for
more contraction of space around the light of your mind
contemplating what cannot be conceived. What cannot be
conceived this morning? The Army has found the larynx of
an Iraqi man that American soldiers slowly strangled to
death. His ribs, additional evidence for the trial, are still
missing. They are in a refrigerator in Washington, D.C.
These are discrete items; whereas how the passage of time
felt as the soldiers strangled him is a continuum of infinite
pain. And his words and songs and prayers and curses he
will never speak are an empty set.
~~~
These roads will take you into your own country.
Seasons and maps coming where this road comes
into a landscape mirrored in these men.
 
Past all your influences, your home river,
constellations of cities, mottoes of childhood,
parents and easy cures, war, all evasion’s wishes.
 
What one word must never be said?
Dead, and these men fight off our dying,
cough in the theatres of the war.
 
What two things shall never be seen?
They : what we did.     Enemy : what we mean.
This is a nation’s scene and halfway house.
 
What three things can never be done?
Forget.     Keep silent.     Stand alone.
The hills of glass, the fatal brilliant plain.
 
The facts of war forced into actual grace.
Seasons and modern glory.     Told in the histories,
               how first ships came
 
seeing on the Atlantic thirteen clouds
lining the west horizon with their white
               shining halations;
 
they conquered, throwing off impossible Europe—
could not be used to transform; created coast—
               breathed-in America.
 
See how they took the land, made after-life
fresh out of exile, planted the pioneer
               base and blockade,
 
pushed forests down in an implacable walk
west where new clouds lay at the desirable
               body of sunset;
 
taking the seaboard.     Replaced the isolation,
dropped cities where they stood, drew a tidewater
               frontier of Europe,
 
a moment, and another frontier held,
this land was planted home-land that we know.
               Ridge of discovery,
 
until we walk to windows, seeing America
lie in a photograph of power, widened
               before our forehead,
 
and still behind us falls another glory,
London unshaken, the long French road to Spain,
               the old Mediterranean
 
flashing new signals from the hero hills
near Barcelona, monuments and powers,
               parent defenses.
 
Before our face the broad and concrete west,
green ripened field, frontier pushed back like river
               controlled and dammed;
 
the flashing wheatfields, cities, lunar plains
grey in Nevada, the sane fantastic country
               sharp in the south,
 
liveoak, the hanging moss, a world of desert,
the dead, the lava, and the extreme arisen
               fountain of life,
 
the flourished land, people with watercourses
to California and the colored sea;
               sums of frontiers
 
and unmade boundaries of acts and poems,
the brilliant scene between the seas, and standing,
               this fact and this disease.
                    ______________
Half-memories absorb us, and our ritual world
carries its history in familiar eyes,
planted in flesh it signifies its music
 
in minds which turn to sleep and memory,
in music knowing all the shimmering names,
the spear, the castle, and the rose.
 
But planted in our flesh these valleys stand,
everywhere we begin to know the illness,
are forced up, and our times confirm us all.
 
In the museum life, centuries of ambition
yielded at last a fertilizing image:
the Carthaginian stone meaning a tall woman
 
carries in her two hands the book and cradled dove,
on her two thighs, wings folded from the waist
cross to her feet, a pointed human crown.
 
This valley is given to us like a glory.
To friends in the old world, and their lifting hands
that call for intercession. Blow falling full in face.
 
All those whose childhood made learn skill to meet,
and art to see after the change of heart;
all the belligerents who know the world.
 
You standing over gorges, surveyors and planners,
you workers and hope of countries, first among powers;
you who give peace and bodily repose,
 
opening landscapes by grace, giving the marvel lowlands
physical peace, flooding old battlefields
with general brilliance, who best love your lives;
 
and you young, you who finishing the poem
wish new perfection and begin to make;
you men of fact, measure our times again.
                    _____________
These are our strength, who strike against history.
These whose corrupt cells owe their new styles of weakness
               to our diseases;
 
these carrying light for safety on their foreheads
descended deeper for richer faults of ore,
               drilling their death.
 
These touching radium and the luminous poison,
carried their death on the lips and with their warning
               glow in their graves.
 
These weaves and their eyes water and rust away,
these stand at wheels until their brains corrode,
               these farm and starve,
 
all these men cry their doom across the world,
meeting avoidable death, fight against madness,
               find every war.
 
Are known as strikers, soldiers, pioneers,
fight on all new frontiers, are set in solid
               lines of defense.
 
Defense is sight; widen the lens and see
standing over the land myths of identity,
               new signals, processes:
 
Alloys begin : certain dominant metals.
Deliberate combines add new qualities,
               sums of new uses.
 
Over the country, from islands of Maine fading,
Cape Sable fading south into the orange
               detail of sunset,
 
new processes, new signals, new possession.
A name for all the conquests, prediction of victory
               deep in these powers.
 
Carry abroad the urgent need, the scene,
to photograph and to extend the voice,
               to speak this meaning.
 
Voices to speak to us directly.     As we move.
As we enrich, growing in larger motion,
               this word, this power.
 
Down coasts of taken countries, mastery,
discovery at one hand, and at the other
               frontiers and forests,
 
fanatic cruel legend at our back and
speeding ahead the red and open west,
               and this our region,
 
desire, field, beginning.    Name and road,
communication to these many men,
as epilogue, seeds of unending love.
 
~~~
Blizzard to lilac. Dandelion
to leaf. Endless
variation of seasons I note
in passing, smells
I cannot smell: rotting
gardens, feces, musk of cat.
These two
run in front of me, golden
shoulder to patchwork, heads
lifted or lowered into
scent, tongues lolling. Ears
damp with their own
spittle and each other's
tell me, tethered a pace behind,
their journey's epic: tipping
forward to the familiar or
stranger's distant yap; angling
to my breathing, whispered
praise, my slightest
suggestion.
Ignored.
The shepherd
throws herself into
any whirring wheel, to herd
the neighbor's tractor mower or
the UPS truck's packets
home; pulling her back,
the golden's oblivious
ballast, instinct heading
always for the gutter's
deepest puddle, her own way
within the forked leash's
one-foot range. As we pass,
the clans set up
their barking, as if we
were news, gathering center
of a congenial warning
din—mine answer with
disturbances of pace, an extra pull
or lollop, grins thrown
slant-eyed over shoulders
until one hears a call
she can't ignore, surrenders
to baying's ferocious
joy moving through
muscle and bone. Moving
storm, storm's eye: happy
universes whirl in their skins
as I do in mine. Unknowable,
their fate. Mediums between
foreign principalities, they're tied
to me, to each other, by my will,
by love; to that other realm
by song, and tooth, and blood.
~~~
See, the grass is full of stars,Fallen in their brightness;Hearts they have of shining gold,Rays of shining whiteness.Buttercups have honeyed hearts,Bees they love the clover,But I love the daisies' danceAll the meadow over.Blow, O blow, you happy winds,Singing summer's praises,Up the field and down the fieldA-dancing with the daisies.
~~~
My mother does not trustwomen without it.What are they not hiding? Renders the dead livingand the living more alive.Everything I say sets the clouds off blubberinglike they knew the pretty dead.True, no mascara, no evidence. Blue sky, blank face. Blank face,a faithful liar, false bottom. Sorrow, a rabbit harbored in the head.The skin, a silly one-act, concurs.At the carnival, each child's cheek becomesa rainbow. God, grant me a brighter myself.Each breath, a game called Live Forever. I am small. Don't ask me to reconcileone shadow with another. I admit—paint the dead pink, it does not make them sunrise. Paint the living blue, it does not make them sky, or sea, a berry, clapboard house, or dead. God, leave us our costumes, don't blow in our noses, strip us to the underside of skin.Even the earth claims coloronce a year, dressed in red leavesas the trees play Grieving.
~~~
Starspangled cowboy
sauntering out of the almost-
silly West, on your face
a porcelain grin,
tugging a papier-mâché cactus
on wheels behind you with a string,
you are innocent as a bathtub
full of bullets.
Your righteous eyes, your laconic
trigger-fingers
people the streets with villains:
as you move, the air in front of you
blossoms with targets
and you leave behind you a heroic
trail of desolation:
beer bottles
slaughtered by the side
of the road, bird-
skulls bleaching in the sunset.
I ought to be watching
from behind a cliff or a cardboard storefront
when the shooting starts, hands clasped
in admiration,
but I am elsewhere.
Then what about me
what about the I
confronting you on that border,
you are always trying to cross?
I am the horizon
you ride towards, the thing you can never lasso
I am also what surrounds you:
my brain
scattered with your
tincans, bones, empty shells,
the litter of your invasions.
I am the space you desecrate
as you pass through.
~~~
FOR DAVID P—B



The eye follows, the land
Slips upward, creases down, forms   
The gentle buttocks of a young   
Giant. In the nestle,
Old adobe bricks, washed of   
Whiteness, paled to umber,
Await another century.
Star Jasmine and old vines
Lay claim upon the ghosted land,   
Then quiet pools whisper   
Private childhood secrets.
Flush on inner cottage walls   
Antiquitous faces,
Used to the gelid breath
Of old manors, glare disdainfully   
Over breached time.
Around and through these   
Cold phantasmatalities,   
He walks, insisting
To the languid air,
Activity, music,
A generosity of graces.
His lupin fields spurn old
Deceit and agile poppies dance
In golden riot.   Each day is
Fulminant, exploding brightly   
Under the gaze of his exquisite   
Sires, frozen in the famed paint   
Of dead masters. Audacious   
Sunlight casts defiance
At their feet.
~~~
The poor have the best views,Views sloping down to sea.A green and yellow planet,A blue band, rung with stars.The poor have the best views.You have to walk to get there.Up three flights, narrow paths,Houses rising steeply side to side.No, no space for a car.When the flag lifts, you see the coast:Yellow curve of sand,Framed by reaching branches.Little humpbacked islands,Soon they will drill for oil there,Deep underwater. Once microscopicDiatoms swarmed in salt, danced, died.Fell to the bottom of fathoms, became black Slick hid in shale. They drill down miles...(Police arriving at the edgeOf   the mind.)Are you thirsty? Something to drink?Please sit down. Yes, the game is on.We built that room by hand. I lieIn bed at night dreaming of a new room,One jutting into sky. The eldestDaughter’s in university. Economics,But she switched to Environment.Out the door, the flag lifts, reveals.(Curve of   Rio.) Ordem e progresso. The poor have the best views,Samba in the sky.
~~~
rain frog          thorn bug          tent bat
along a broken mosaic    a spongy    ever-dwindling path
soaring trees    woody buttresses    their massive twisted fins
lofty crowns    shoulder to shoulder    climbing lime-green
vines    restless palms    one strangling plant    clinging to
choking another    a discontinuous canopy of branches and leaves
impenetrable    alive and teeming    tangled underbrush
the deeply shaded soil    lumpy roots    writhing
across the forest floor    low-growing ferns    seedlings
struggling for light    jewel-colored hummingbirds
insects sizzling and clicking and the dripping water
trickling into the tiniest crevices    steamy
claustrophobic air    a dazzling bellbird    lost
in a shaft of sunlight    a golden eyelash viper
sinuous as a vein on a broad-leafed frond    flat worms
land leeches    walnut-sized spiders    goliath beetles
camouflaged butterflies on dead leaves    parasites    bees
leaf-cutting ants atop glorious white lilies    everywhere
gripping    climbing    twisting    floating through the trees
stilt-like aerial roots    the mouth-amazed pitcher plant
buried larvae    fruit-eating fish    the perpetual battle to adapt
the ruthless drive    to survive under a punishing sun
what grows    bursts forth at astonishing speed    then decomposes
to be reabsorbed    so much unknown    unfamiliar
unnamed    but before long    the trees seem the same
the rocks    every bird track    who would dare think of such a place
who would dare        construct one         of his own imagining
and be utterly abandoned    in the middle of it all
if to be lost is to be fully present    if confusion becomes
the only boundary    and then    the decision    [to divide space
until a direction is created]    only a madman would begin
thought is its own cage    the mind    already anticipating
the first step    deciding    every turn will be coupled
by disaster    and perhaps    some bestial creature
crouched at the center    crying    waiting
for our hero    our everyman    our Elijah wandering the earth in rags
~~~
for Alan



This, then, is the gift the world has given me
(you have given me)
softly the snow
cupped in hollows
lying on the surface of the pond
matching my long white candles
which stand at the window
which will burn at dusk while the snow
fills up our valley
this hollow
no friend will wander down
no one arriving brown from Mexico
from the sunfields of California, bearing pot
they are scattered now, dead or silent
or blasted to madness
by the howling brightness of our once common vision
and this gift of yours—
white silence filling the contours of my life.
~~~
I ran into the afterlife.
No fluffy white clouds. Not even stars. Only sky
dark as the inside of a movie theater
at three in the afternoon and getting bigger all the time,
expanding at terrific speed
over the car which was disappearing,
flattening out empty
as the fields on either side.
                                             It was impossible to think
under that rain louder than engines.
I turned off the radio to listen, let my head
fill up until every bone
was vibrating—sky.
                            Twice, trees of lightning
broke out of the asphalt. I could smell
the highway burning. Long after, saw blue smoke twirling
behind the eyeballs, lariats
doing fancy rope tricks, jerking silver
dollars out of the air, along with billiard cues, ninepins.
I was starting to feel I could drive forever
when suddenly one of those trees was right in front of me.
Of course, I hit it—
branches shooting stars down the windshield,
poor car shaking like a dazed cow.
I thought this time for sure I was dead
so whatever was on the other side had to be eternity.
Saw sky enormous as nowhere. Kept on driving.
~~~
Even now this landscape is assembling.
The hills darken. The oxen
sleep in their blue yoke,
the fields having been
picked clean, the sheaves
bound evenly and piled at the roadside
among cinquefoil, as the toothed moon rises:
This is the barrenness
of harvest or pestilence.
And the wife leaning out the window
with her hand extended, as in payment,
and the seeds
distinct, gold, callingCome here
Come here, little one
~~~
O white little lights at Carney’s Point,      You shine so clear o’er the Delaware;When the moon rides high in the silver sky,      Then you gleam, white gems on the Delaware.Diamond circlet on a full white throat,      You laugh your rays on a questioning boat;Is it peace you dream in your flashing gleam,      O’er the quiet flow of the Delaware?And the lights grew dim at the water’s brim,      For the smoke of the mills shredded slow between;And the smoke was red, as is new bloodshed,      And the lights went lurid ’neath the livid screen.O red little lights at Carney’s Point,      You glower so grim o’er the Delaware;When the moon hides low sombrous clouds below,      Then you glow like coals o’er the Delaware.Blood red rubies on a throat of fire,      You flash through the dusk of a funeral pyre;And there hearth fires red whom you fear and dread      O’er the turgid flow of the Delaware?And the lights gleamed gold o’er the river cold,      For the murk of the furnace shed a copper veil;And the veil was grim at the great cloud’s brim,      And the lights went molten, now hot, now pale.O gold little lights at Carney’s Point,     You gleam so proud o’er the Delaware;When the moon grows wan in the eastering dawn,      Then you sparkle gold points o’er the Delaware.Aureate filagree on a Croesus’ brow,      You hasten the dawn on a gray ship’s prow.Light you streams of gold in the grim ship’s hold      O’er the sullen flow of the Delaware?And the lights went gray in the ash of day,      For a quiet Aurora brought a halcyon balm;And the sun laughed high in the infinite sky,      And the lights were forgot in the sweet, sane calm.
~~~
Anna Kyle Brown. Osage.
1896-1921. Fairfax, Oklahoma.




Because she died where the ravine falls into water.
Because they dragged her down to the creek.
In death, she wore her blue broadcloth skirt.
Though frost blanketed the grass she cooled her feet in the spring.
Because I turned the log with my foot.
Her slippers floated downstream into the dam.
Because, after the thaw, the hunters discovered her body.
 
Because she lived without our mother.
Because she had inherited head rights for oil beneath the land.
She was carrying his offspring.
The sheriff disguised her death as whiskey poisoning.
Because, when he carved her body up, he saw the bullet hole in her skull.
Because, when she was murdered, the leg clutchers bloomed.
But then froze under the weight of frost.
During Xtha-cka Zhi-ga Tze-the, the Killer of the Flowers Moon.
I will wade across the river of the blackfish, the otter, the beaver.
I will climb the bank where the willow never dies.
~~~
     I. Springing JackGreen wooden leaves clap light away,Severely practical, as theyShelter the children candy-pale,The chestnut-candles flicker, fail . . .The showman’s face is cubed clear asThe shapes reflected in a glassOf water—(glog, glut, a ghost’s speechFumbling for space from each to each).The fusty showman fumbles, must Fit in a particle of dustThe universe, for fear it gainIts freedom from my cube of brain.Yet dust bears seeds that grow to graceBehind my crude-striped wooden faceAs I, a puppet tinsel-pinkLeap on my springs, learn how to think—Till like the trembling golden stalkOf some long-petalled star, I walkThrough the dark heavens, and the dewFalls on my eyes and sense thrills through.     II. The Ape Watches “Aunt Sally”The apples are an angel’s meat;The shining dark leaves make clear sweetThe juice; green wooden fruits alwayFall on these flowers as white as day—(Clear angel-face on hairy stalk:Soul grown from flesh, an ape’s young talk!)And in this green and lovely groundThe Fair, world-like, turns round and roundAnd bumpkins throw their pence to shedAunt Sally’s wooden clear-striped head.—I do not care if men should throwRound sun and moon to make me go—As bright as gold and silver pence . . .They cannot drive their black shade hence!
~~~
There’s an Isle, a green Isle, set in the sea,     Here’s to the Saint that blessed it!And here’s to the billows wild and free     That for centuries have caressed it!Here’s to the day when the men that roam     Send longing eyes o’er the water!Here’s to the land that still spells home     To each loyal son and daughter!Here’s to old Ireland—fair, I ween,     With the blue skies stretched above her!Here’s to her shamrock warm and green,     And here’s to the hearts that love her!
~~~
Just for this evening, let's not mock them.
Not their curtsies or cross-garters
or ever-recurring pepper trees in their gardens
promising, promising.
At least they had ideas about love.
All day we've driven past cornfields, past cows poking their heads
through metal contraptions to eat.
We've followed West 84, and what else?
Irrigation sprinklers fly past us, huge wooden spools in the fields,
lounging sheep, telephone wires,
yellowing flowering shrubs.
Before us, above us, the clouds swell, layers of them,
the violet underneath of clouds.
Every idea I have is nostalgia. Look up:
there is the sky that passenger pigeons darkened and filled—
darkened for days, eclipsing sun, eclipsing all other sound
with the thunder of their wings.
After a while, it must have seemed that they followed
not instinct or pattern but only
one another.
When they stopped, Audubon observed,
they broke the limbs of stout trees by the weight of the numbers.
And when we stop we'll follow—what?
Our hearts?
The Puritans thought that we are granted the ability to love
only through miracle,
but the troubadours knew how to burn themselves through,
how to make themselves shrines to their own longing.
The spectacular was never behind them.
Think of days of those scarlet-breasted, blue-winged birds above you.
Think of me in the garden, humming
quietly to myself in my blue dress,
a blue darker than the sky above us, a blue dark enough for storms,
though cloudless.
At what point is something gone completely?
The last of the sunlight is disappearing
even as it swells—
Just for this evening, won't you put me before you
until I'm far enough away you can
believe in me?
Then try, try to come closer—
my wonderful and less than.
~~~
The moon came late to a lonesome bog, And there sat Goggleky Gluck, the frog. ‘My stars!’ she cried, and veiled her face, ‘What very grand people they have in this place!’
~~~
All our roads go nowhere.
Maps are curled
To keep the pavement definitely
On the world.
All our footsteps, set to make
Metric advance,
Lapse into arcs in deference
To circumstance.
All our journeys nearing Space
Skirt it with care,
Shying at the distances
Present in air.
Blithely travel-stained and worn,
Erect and sure,
All our travels go forth,
Making down the roads of Earth
Endless detour.
~~~
Mown meadows skirt the standing wheat;
I linger, for the hay is sweet,
New-cut and curing in the sun.
Like furrows, straight, the windrows run,
Fallen, gallant ranks that tossed and bent
When, yesterday, the west wind went
A-rioting through grass and grain.
To-day no least breath stirs the plain;
Only the hot air, quivering, yields
Illusive motion to the fields
Where not the slenderest tassel swings.
Across the wheat flash sky-blue wings;
A goldfinch dangles from a tall,
Full-flowered yellow mullein; all
The world seems turning blue and gold.
Unstartled, since, even from of old,
Beauty has brought keen sense of her,
I feel the withering grasses stir;
Along the edges of the wheat,
I hear the rustle of her feet:
And yet I know the whole sea lies,
And half the earth, between our eyes.
~~~
Camille Corot's painting, stolen from the Louvre, May 1998



It might have always been meant  that they walked completely away,  this man on horse, woman with basket.  With their backs to us and the painter,  they are so private. But like those stories  where children step right into a picture  and, looking over their shoulders,  see the consoling frame,  these two would know the way home  like the palms of their hands, the routine  so ordinary it most encloses,  no need for thought, only motion  and the full sensation of sun  on your flesh, along the usual road.
~~~
Now the rich cherry, whose sleek wood,
And top with silver petals traced
Like a strict box its gems encased,
Has spilt from out that cunning lid,
All in an innocent green round,
Those melting rubies which it hid;
With moss ripe-strawberry-encrusted,
So birds get half, and minds lapse merry
To taste that deep-red, lark’s-bite berry,
And blackcap bloom is yellow-dusted.
The wren that thieved it in the eaves
A trailer of the rose could catch
To her poor droopy sloven thatch,
And side by side with the wren’s brood—
O lovely time of beggar’s luck—
Opens the quaint and hairy bud;
And full and golden is the yield
Of cows that never have to house,
But all night nibble under boughs,
Or cool their sides in the moist field.
Into the rooms flow meadow airs,
The warm farm baking smell’s blown round.
Inside and out, and sky and ground
Are much the same; the wishing star,
Hesperus, kind and early born,
Is risen only finger-far;
All stars stand close in summer air,
And tremble, and look mild as amber;
When wicks are lighted in the chamber,
They are like stars which settled there.
Now straightening from the flowery hay,
Down the still light the mowers look,
Or turn, because their dreaming shook,
And they waked half to other days,
When left alone in the yellow stubble
The rusty-coated mare would graze.
Yet thick the lazy dreams are born,
Another thought can come to mind,
But like the shivering of the wind,
Morning and evening in the corn.
~~~
Something in the field is
working away. Root-noise.
Twig-noise. Plant
of weak chlorophyll, no
name for it. Something
in the field has mastered
distance by living too close
to fences. Yellow fruit, has it
pit or seeds? Stalk of wither. Grass-
noise fighting weed-noise. Dirt
and chant. Something in the
field. Coreopsis. I did not mean
to say that. Yellow petal, has it
wither-gift? Has it gorgeous
rash? Leaf-loss and worried
sprout, its bursting art. Some-
thing in the. Field fallowed and
cicada. I did not mean to
say. Has it roar and bloom?
Has it road and follow? A thistle
prick, fraught burrs, such
easy attachment. Stem-
and stamen-noise. Can I lime-
flower? Can I chamomile?
Something in the field cannot.
~~~
Feet firmly perch
thinnest stalks, reeds, bulrush.
Until all at once, they attend my
female form, streaked throat, brownness.
Three fly equidistant
around me, flashing.
Each, in turn, calls territorial
trills, beckons ok-a-li, ok-a-li!
Spreads his wings, extends
inner muscle quivering red
epaulet bands uniquely bolden.
Turn away each suitor,
mind myself my audience.
Select another to consider,
He in turn quiver thrills.
Leave for insects.
Perhaps one male follows.
Maybe a few brood of young,
line summertime.
Silver Maple samaras
wing wind, spread clusters
along with mine, renewing Prairie.
As summer closes, I leave
dragonflies, damselflies, butterflies,
mosquitoes, moths, spiders, crickets for
grain, see, Sunflower;
join thousands to flock Sky—
grackles, blackbirds, cowbirds,     starlings—
Swarming like distant smoke clouds, rising.
~~~
They lie under stars in a field. They lie under rain in a field. Under sun.  Some people are like this as well— like a painting hidden beneath another painting.  An unexpected weight the sign of their ripeness.
~~~
A fall over rock,
Metal answering to water,   
Is the seal of this spot;
A land trodden by music   
And the tune forgot.
Of a region savage,
The territory that was broken,
Silver gushed free;
And earth holy, earth meek shall receive it   
In humility.
This, not dwelt in, this haunted,   
The country of the proud,
Is curdling to stone,
And careless of the feet of the waters   
As they glance from it down.
~~~
i
 
thees wite skirtes / & orang                                
sweters     / i wont / inn the feedynge marte /
wile mye vegetable partes bloome /
inn the commen waye /   a grackel   
inn the guarden rooste /    the tall   
wymon wasching handes /                
or eyeing turnups   
/ the sadened powres wee rub /             so economicalie /
inn 1 virsion off thynges /
alarum is mye nayme
                           / unkempt & handeld
i am hors /
i am sadeld /      i am a brokn hors

  ii
                  the bit provydes
                  its hors / the rocke
                  provyded a boye
blessynge gode / i wantd 1
       secrete but fore the rod
       inn this / mye longish throte / i kno
       no new waye / 2 speech
       this / the powre off lyons
  iii
 
 tonite i wuld luv to rite the mothe inn the guarden / 2  greev   it   /   &   as   a   mater   off  forme  /   did   u   kno  not a monthe goes bye  /  a tran i kno doesnt dye  /  just  shye   off   27   /   its   such   a   plesure   to   b   alive   /  inn  this  trembled  soot  /  u  lent  /  shock  is  a  struktured  responce  /  a  whord  lost  inn  the  mouthe  off keepers  /  &  u thum at the mothe  /  a dozen bes  / i  tetherred  thees  nites  /  i  gathred  so  manie  treees
~~~
I shall go back again to the bleak shore
And build a little shanty on the sand,
In such a way that the extremest band
Of brittle seaweed will escape my door
But by a yard or two; and nevermore
Shall I return to take you by the hand;
I shall be gone to what I understand,
And happier than I ever was before.
The love that stood a moment in your eyes,
The words that lay a moment on your tongue,
Are one with all that in a moment dies,
A little under-said and over-sung.
But I shall find the sullen rocks and skies
Unchanged from what they were when I was young.
~~~
              The grasses are light brown
              and the ocean comes in
              long shimmering lines
              under the fleet from last night
              which dozes now in the early morning
Here and there horses graze
              on somebody’s acreage
                               Strangely, it was not my desire
that bade me speak in church to be released
         but memory of the way it used to be in
careless and exotic play
               when characters were promises
      then recognitions.  The world of transformation
is real and not real but trusting.
                            Enough of these lessons?  I mean
didactic phrases to take you in and out of
love’s mysterious bonds?
                      Well I myself am not myself
           and which power of survival I speak
for is not made of houses.
          It is inner luxury, of golden figures
that breathe like mountains do
            and whose skin is made dusky by stars.
~~~
i. 
My body a full echo                I dawdle down to the creek
                          Ask the god of blood for
                          Abundance     continuity
                                      My offering      the syrup of pressed beans   &
                                      A 7-winged tulip
 
ii. 
Later the rains swell the creek with coffee            the storm        a beckoned sheet
The immortal herself reaping the earth          the tongues cut out of the cows
 
iii. 
I walk in                       as the wash      attempts its valiant swallow 
             A cafeteria aid             wipes the cotton from the counter
             Her bald eyes              aurora with       seeds
                         You brought that           didn’t you?
 
iv. 
                                                               My bottom lip a pink venom     My desire a valley with
                                                               legs       His steady fingers toying the tea            I look
                                                               up to a straight line and bury it    Can’t downsize what
                                                               hithers me
                                                               Every now & then a troubled thirst
                                                               opens my mouth for a song that does not come
                                                                            I feel it all
                                                                      until a fixed voice decides
                                                                                        No      but wait      you’re the water
~~~
Where sunless rivers weepTheir waves into the deep,She sleeps a charmed sleep:
     Awake her not.Led by a single star,She came from very farTo seek where shadows are
     Her pleasant lot.She left the rosy morn,She left the fields of corn,For twilight cold and lorn
     And water springs.Through sleep, as through a veil,She sees the sky look pale,And hears the nightingale
     That sadly sings.Rest, rest, a perfect restShed over brow and breast;Her face is toward the west,
     The purple land.She cannot see the grainRipening on hill and plain;She cannot feel the rain
     Upon her hand.Rest, rest, for evermoreUpon a mossy shore;Rest, rest at the heart's core
     Till time shall cease:Sleep that no pain shall wake;Night that no morn shall breakTill joy shall overtake
     Her perfect peace.
~~~
The song is Gaelic now,
peridot words
the color of fresh
timothy gathered
by red-haired women;
or the song
is the bony white oak
and rhythm of Miwu,
a knowing that breathes
against angles of granite
and meets the ground
in a flurry of sound.
Or the song rides down from a star
over burgundy boulders
beneath a dazzling blue sky
to find the old words
buried deep in the earth.
But this heart listens.
This song. Hi-tsah-tsi-nah,
the precious rain awakening.
On this you come
as a prayer in the flesh,
on this you ride
with the roll and rollick
of rattlesnake.
On this you sing
volcanic birthing words
and obsidian cools where
the blood bubbles down.
          Oh look, a little girl is lost
          although she stands close
          to her mother’s heart.
          With great energy she scrapes
          the missionaries from her ribs.
          Shoulder blades curve
          around the spine
          and the pestle dances,
          acorns flying,
          and dust collects
          in the creases
          of her hands. Or
     she is kneeling in a small room
     at the edge of the mesa,
     polished black bone of earth,
     cherished piki stone,
     moving back and forth
     this act of love, grinding
     the corn until it is dark,
     brushing the white cornmeal
     into one basket, the blue
     into another, thinking already
     of the daughters she will bear
     glowing in the sun.
Or she is standing at the bog
inside a mountain meadow,
hands raised up to tie back her hair
with a thin red rag; seeds loosen
and cling to her shoes, her stockings,
her long skirt, her skin.
She fearlessly walks
through gold fiddleneck,
small mountain lupines, clouds
of white popcorn flowers fallen upward
out of the ground
to cover the hillside
like snow. Or
          a woman gathers loop after loop
          of heavy rope to guide the head
          of the horse she straddles and sometimes
          she is the mare and the soft sandstone
          and the hot rocks rolling in acorn soup,
          trying to heal the gash spread across her path
          where the crescent moon has sliced the earth.
          Ocean to mountain to mesa, the bundle she carries
          is a sacred memory, a rainbow that arches
          from one side of the sky to the other.
Or a woman is closing
a steamer trunk, has to sit on it hard
to get the latch through and
the leather buckled; seagulls dive
outside the wall of the ship, she
hears their demands, maybe one
has come inside to brush her cheek
with its pointed wing or maybe
just another tear warmed by cooling blood.
How she aches in the cold, she is so thin;
and when she pulls the blanket around her
and lies down on the floor, she is no more
than a pile of old rags, a few sticks of firewood,
a broken broom. Steady against the roll of the sea
she is patient as the rocks that wait for the ship
along a northern corridor, angry as the storms
midway across the Atlantic that shake their fists
at those who must leave home, and as deeply hidden
as the icebergs that threaten to disembowl.
She has already seen the world dissolve;
now she feels the breaking
of one last thread
to ancestral land,
feels the very break
of it.
~~~
A cold night crosses
our path
                  The world appears
very large, very
round now       extending
far as the moon does
                                        It is from
the moon this cold travels
                                        It is
the light of the moon that causes
this night reflecting distance in its own
light so coldly
                                          (from one side of
the earth to the other)
                                        It is the length of this coldness
It is the long distance
between two points which are
not in a line        now
                                       not a
straightness       (however
straight) but a curve only,
silver that is a rock reflecting
                                                      not metal
but a rock accepting
distance
                     (a scream in silence
where between the two
points what touches
is a curve around the world
                                                      (the dance unmoving).
 new york, 1969
~~~
Like people
emerging from a steambath,
bending over,
steaming from their heads
and shoulders,
the ring of the mountains
from the Chilkat Range
to the Juneau ice field
as if in steambath towels
of snow flurries;
at their feet
are foaming white caps of sea
like water thrown on rocks
steaming from the heat.