
~~~
Beloved, men in thick green coats came crunching
through the snow, the insignia on their shoulders
of uncertain origin, a country I could not be sure of,
a salute so terrifying I heard myself lying to avoid
arrest, and was arrested along with Jocko, whose tear
had snapped off, a tiny icicle he put in his mouth.
We were taken to the ice prison, a palace encrusted
with hoarfrost, its dome lit from within, Jocko admired
the wiring, he kicked the walls to test the strength
of his new boots.  A television stood in a block of ice,
its blue image still moving like a liquid center.
You asked for my innermost thoughts.  I wonder will I
ever see a grape again?  When I think of the vineyard
where we met in October—when you dropped a cluster
custom insisted you be kissed by a stranger—how after
the harvest we plunged into a stream so icy our palms
turned pink.  It seemed our future was sealed.  Everyone
said so.  It is quiet here.  Not closing our ranks
weakens us hugely.  The snowflakes fall in a featureless
bath.  I am the stranger who kissed you.  On sunny days
each tree is a glittering chandelier.  The power of
mindless beauty!  Jocko told a joke and has been dead
since May.  A bullethole in his forehead the officers
call a third eye.  For a month I milked a barnful of
cows.  It is a lot like cleansing a chandelier.  Wipe
and polish, wipe and polish, round and round you go.
I have lost my spectacles.  Is the book I was reading
still open by the side of our bed?  Treat it as a bookmark
saving my place in our story.
 
(here the letter breaks off)
~~~
In green water I saw your eye and in it I saw that Arabian palace
filled with birds and broken glass.
                                                                  I copy an address into my right hand
and fill myself with memories of psalms.
A green fish emerges from seaweed as seaweed from a wave
                                                                  that rises like the wailing wall.
My sun-baked body at the edge,
wind in my lungs, its whistle,
my torn world, my grief,
my soggy passport, my shell with no pearl,
you lift them, delicate cloud, into a liquid world.
Last night I dreamed of my father's flabby body and of my blue
resolve to run away, to find a way, I dreamed of your eye
                                                            and for an instant I found the vertex of the road,
the imaginary line that falls across the earth:
               that meridian where the sun on a tiger's back meets the shade at its belly.
Waking up, we are swallowed by wakefulness.
The house swallows us in its terrible thirst. The routine of taking our children
to school swallows us
                                                   and so does the if only I could.
There was something to that dream. You know it. A direction. A way.
                                                                   A forest as green as you and your roots.
Give me your premonitions, give me your book, give me your prodigious memory,
give me the blue gaze from your dark eye, give me the devotion of your sleeping birds.
Sometimes the way is a fire
through which the circus tiger
                                                           leaps, a perfect circle
                                                                           returning to me with its stripes intact
and with the endless continuity of this ineluctably feral world.
~~~
Clownlike, happiest on your hands,   
Feet to the stars, and moon-skulled,   
Gilled like a fish. A common-sense   
Thumbs-down on the dodo’s mode.   
Wrapped up in yourself like a spool,   
Trawling your dark as owls do.   
Mute as a turnip from the Fourth   
Of July to All Fools’ Day,
O high-riser, my little loaf.
Vague as fog and looked for like mail.   
Farther off than Australia.
Bent-backed Atlas, our traveled prawn.   
Snug as a bud and at home   
Like a sprat in a pickle jug.   
A creel of eels, all ripples.   
Jumpy as a Mexican bean.   
Right, like a well-done sum.   
A clean slate, with your own face on.
~~~
It snakes behind me, this invisible chain gang—
the aliases, your many faces peopling
that vast hotel, the past. What did we learn?
Every twenty minutes the elevated train,
the world shuddering beyond
the pane. It was never warm enough in winter.
The walls peeled, the color of corsages
ruined in the air. Sweeping the floor,
my black wig on the chair. I never meant
to leave you in that hotel where the voices
of patrons long gone seemed to echo in the halls,
a scent of spoiled orchids. But this was never
an elegant hotel. The iron fretwork of the El
held each room in a deep corrosive bloom.
This was the bankrupt’s last chance, the place
the gambler waits to learn his black mare’s
leg snapped as she hurtled towards the finish line.
* * *
How did we live? Your face over my shoulder
was the shade of mahogany in the speckled
mirror bolted to the wall. It was never warm.
You arrived through a forest of needles,
the white mist of morphine, names for sleep
that never came. My black wig unfurled
across the battered chair. Your arms circled me
when I stood by the window. Downstairs
the clerk who read our palms broke the seal
on another deck of cards. She said you’re my fate,
my sweet annihilating angel, every naked hotel room
I’ve ever checked out of. There’s nothing
left of that, but even now when night pulls up
like a limousine, sea-blue, and I’m climbing the stairs,
keys in hand, I’ll reach the landing and
you’re there—the one lesson I never get right.
Trains hurtled by, extinguished somewhere
past the bend of midnight. The shuddering world.
Your arms around my waist. I never meant to leave.
* * *
Of all that, there's nothing left but a grid
of shadows the El tracks throw over the street,
the empty lot. Gone, the blistered sills,
voices that rilled across each wall. Gone,
the naked bulb swinging from the ceiling,
that chicanery of light that made your face
a brief eclipse over mine. How did we live?
The mare broke down. I was your fate, that
yellow train, the plot of sleet, through dust
crusted on the pane. It wasn't warm enough.
What did we learn? All I have left of you
is this burnt place on my arm. So, I won't
forget you even when I'm nothing but
small change in the desk clerk's palm, nothing
but the pawn ticket crumpled in your pocket,
the one you'll never redeem. Whatever I meant
to say loses itself in the bend of winter
towards extinction, this passion of shadows falling
like black orchids through the air. I never meant
to leave you there by the pane, that
terminal hotel, the world shuddering with trains.
~~~
The first line is a row of girls,
twenty-five of them, almost
a painting, shoulders overlapping,
angled slightly toward you.
One says: I’m myself here.
The others shudder and laugh
through the ribbon core that strings
them. They make a tone tighter
by drumming on their thighs and
opening their mouths. The girls
are cells. The girls are a fence,
a fibrous network. One by one
they describe their grievances.
Large hot malfunctioning
machines lie obediently at their sides.
Their shirts are various shades
of ease in the surrounding air,
which is littered with small cuts.
One will choose you, press you
into the ground. You may never
recover. The second-to-last line
has a fold in it. The last line is
the steady pour of their names.
~~~
When I beeheld the Image of my deere    With greedy lookes mine eyes would that way bend,    Fear, and desire did inwardly contend;    Feare to bee mark’d, desire to drawe still neere,And in my soule a speritt wowld apeer,    Which boldnes waranted, and did pretend    To bee my genius, yett I durst nott lend    My eyes in trust wher others seemed soe cleere,Then did I search from whence this danger ’rose,    If such unworthynes in mee did rest    As my sterv’d eyes must nott with sight bee blest;    When jealousie her poyson did disclose;Yett in my hart unseense of jealous eyeThe truer Image shall in triumph lye.
~~~
What is thy thought of me?What is thy feeling?Lov'st thou the veil of sense,Or its revealing?Leav'st thou the maiden roseDrooping and blushing,Or rend'st its bosom withKissing and crushing?I would be beautifulThat thou should'st woo me,Gentle, delightsome, butTo draw thee to me.Yet should thy longing eyeEver caress me,And quickened FantasyOnly, possess me,Thus thy heart's highest needLong would I cherish,Lest its more trivial wishPall, and then perish.Would that Love's fond pursuitWere crownèd never,Or that his virgin kissLasted for ever!
~~~
What do I owe to you        
 Who loved me deep and long? You never gave my spirit wings  
 Nor gave my heart a song.   But oh, to him I loved,        
 Who loved me not at all, I owe the little open gate  
 That led through heaven’s wall.
~~~
What we built to hold us, the year's memory,menus and daytrips, after a whilecame loose. Those nightswe balanced on each other's mistakes,cradling our wine:twigs those branches now.Who knew what lived there?She she she called one bird.What lived there knew its place.Another bird splits its nest wide,hinges the gap with spider silk, learningto give, to give, to give until breaking. Only then—either one gives until breaking or one does not.
~~~
If thou must love me, let it be for nought Except for love's sake only. Do not say I love her for her smile ... her look ... her way Of speaking gently, ... for a trick of thought That falls in well with mine, and certes brought A sense of pleasant ease on such a day'— For these things in themselves, Belovèd, may Be changed, or change for thee,—and love, so wrought, May be unwrought so. Neither love me for Thine own dear pity's wiping my cheeks dry,— A creature might forget to weep, who bore Thy comfort long, and lose thy love thereby! But love me for love's sake, that evermore Thou may'st love on, through love's eternity.
~~~
Pillows & ribbons harness barefoot friends,
                            haughty sisters & smiles; mothers watch, snoring.
             Dirty Jeep, broken January; darkness steals my grief.                            I cannot imagine something more fragile than marriage.
You held my hand.
                           We listened to the Callas arias on our porch.
              You kept rewinding the love song back to the beginning
                            to the place where she saings, Certainly not today.
               Leaf shadows tent walls. My tongue traces
                            tattoos & scars. Strange shirts
               mingle in the dryer. Tangled sand, uncomfortable
                             legs, wasted days spent memorizing the body
                I'd soon share. Bride, bridge, bridle: all signs said,
                                                        Don't wife her.
I have learned how to hollow beginnings,
                            rewind homes & wedding veils.
             Your drool, the doorknob, clumsy knots.
                           Today the map is mortified.
In bed, polka dots, miscarriage.
                           Weather changes leaves, fragile-making.
(not even divorcing in the eyes of the law:                 dissolving)
I remember my sorrow at finding ants housed in my mother's peonies.
                 When we moved, the new residents tore out all her flower beds,
the strawberry patch & the treehouse. I drove you there to show you.
                                                         You held my hand.
 
~~~
The following poems and collages were created for Victoria Martinez’s solo show, Celestial House, at Loyola University Museum of Art (LUMA) as odes to the homes and Chicago neighborhoods the artists grew up in. All collages are by Victoria Martinez and all poems are by José Olivarez.
 

Victoria MartinezPantry Secrets, 2018, collage, 15 × 10 in.
                            
Nation of Domination
my mom hugs me & wants me to stay. i have my foot
on the pedal. a fake gold chain on my neck. i confess
i’m a sucker. i never want magicians to reveal their secrets.
i want to live in the unknowing where everything is possible.
my mom dances with me to Los Bukis. she thinks this makes
me her baby still. perspective is a magic trick. i hit my brother
with the Rock Bottom & i bet you can guess what i leave out.
ask Farooq if you need a hint. the brain is full of magic
i don’t understand. no one signs up to take a dive. in wrestling,
there’s a team of writers who decide who wins and who loses.
the metaphor is obvious. my mom wasn’t born to play the role
of mom, i don’t care how many baby dolls she played with.
i dance with my mom to Los Bukis & you’re a fool
if you believe it’s her son she’s trying to hold on to.
 
Victoria MartinezPillow Talk, 2018, collage, 15 × 10 in.
                            
moonshine
the poets are right about the moonlight.
i take my spot of sky & deposit it
into a savings account. only after
the bank confiscated our house
did i understand. roses
don’t grow without pricked hands.
i didn’t have to spend a summer in a freezer
packing lunch meat to know the value
of sunlight. my mom didn’t have
to spend a decade wiping down floors to appreciate
education. when i give you a bouquet of roses,
i give you a bouquet of bloody hands.
a handful of dirt & the worms that doted on your roses.
when i take my piece of sky out of the bank,
it’s smaller. the drunks are right about moonshine.
 
Victoria MartinezHoyne, 2018, collage, 15 × 10 in.
                            
Shelter Island
frigid are the branches of black trees cutting through
a blacker night. missing are the lampposts that adorn
every few feet of New York. cold is your hand in my hand
& yes, i am a man, & you are a woman. my wilderness
is not unlike the woods that surround us. the sky in my wild
lit by lanterns in the faces of animals. my own flammable face.
my father’s temperament. my thrifted excuse. yes,
it’s the night before 45 is sworn in as president,
& yes, we leave the city, & we would leave the planet, too.
you hold my hand & we walk into the teeth of the hour
armed with each other. bitter cold is the world we leave behind.
when we hold hands, we invent a spaceship.
​
                
~~~
Nothing is nothing, although
he would call me that, she was nothing.
Those were his words, but his hand was lifting
cigarettes in chains and bridges
of ash-light. He said he didn't want his body to last.
It wasn't a year I could argue
against that kind of talk, so I cut the fowl
killed on the farm a mile out—brown and silvery, wild—
and put it over butter lettuce, lettuce then lime.
I heated brandy in the saucepan, poured a strip of molasses
slowly through the cold, slow as I'd seen
a shaman pour pine tincture over the floor
of my beaten house.
She seemed to see my whole life
by ordinance of some god
who wanted me alive again.
Burnt sage, blue smoke. Then sea salt shaken
into the corners of violent sadness.
She wrote my address
across her chest
to let everything listening know
where my life was made.
We waited, either forgetting what we were
or becoming more brightly human in that pine,
in her trance, in the lavender I set on the chipped sills,
not a trance at all but my deliberate hand cutting
from the yard part of what she required.
Now wait longer, she said, and I did as I would
when the molasses warmed over the pot enough
to come into the brandy,
to come into the night
begun by small confessions—
that this was just a rental, and mine just a floor,
that the woman he loved was with another man,
his mother mad, his apartment haunted in the crawl space.
Then I told of the assault at daybreak between
the houses. Heat, asphalt, all of it and my face toward
the brick school where the apostolate studied first-century script
and song. There must have been chanting,
as it was on the hour.
What we said was liturgy meant only for us
and for that night. Not for anyone else
to repeat, live by, believe. Never that.
Our only theories were inside of our hands,
flesh and land, body and prairie.
I reached to smoke down his next-to-last,
which he lit and made ready.
The poultry like a war ration
we ate all the way through.
What we wished, we said.
What we said, we found that night
by these, and no other,
means.
 
~~~
Dark thing,
make a myth of yourself:
all women turn into lilacs,
all men grow sick of their errant scent.
You could learn
to build a window, to change flesh
into isinglass, nothing
but a brittle river, a love of bone.
You could snap like a branch—No,
this way
~~~
A boy from Brooklyn used to cruise on summer nights.
As soon as he’d hit sixty he’d hold his hand out the window,
cupping it around the wind. He’d been assured
this is exactly how a woman’s breast feels when you put
your hand around it and apply a little pressure. Now he knew,
and he loved it. Night after night, again and again, until
the weather grew cold and he had to roll the window up.
For many years afterwards he was perpetually attempting
to soar. One winter’s night, holding his wife’s breast
in his hand, he closed his eyes and wanted to weep.
He loved her, but it was the wind he imagined now.
As he grew older, he loved the word etcetera and refused
to abbreviate it. He loved sweet white butter. He often
pretended to be playing the organ. On one of his last mornings,
he noticed the shape of his face molded in the pillow.
He shook it out, but the next morning it reappeared.
~~~
Eight stars make A soft solfege  Above this motel Where there are never  Stars. I let a skinny man  Put his long thick dick in me for you So we could break our hearts  The way you want me to. Somewhere a white Wall stretches up behind the backs of a tribe  Whose obscurity protects its secret from the common World and the connivances it ordains.  What time is it. What season is it. I don’t know.  The moon blows green Gas into my skull  I want to hide what I dream In a big boot, and wear the boot  And starve as I lean upon the boot of my destitution And drag  The truth as a gimp would drag the weight of her body. That would give me a feeling of honesty.
~~~
In different cities, on different
forms of transportation, a woman read Daniel Deronda
until the year became the arbitrary pink
the calendar chose for the middle of winter.
And finally she sat in the reference section
of the public library finishing Daniel Deronda
for days at a slowing pace between piecesof newspapers and foreign language newspaperswhose syntax she enjoyed, not understanding.And when she didn't anymore she wrote in the marginsof Daniel Deronda for someonewho might never see. Thought of that personwho might never see, staring equally at the rain, equallythinking of her and of nothing in particular.Outside the news fell apart. If one choosesto be shallow or noble, or oneis born so, and if it matters. Translationsare appropriate when Nature is dormant, or when onehas nothing to say, or does not knowwhat to say. These are three different thingsbut sometimes they are the same.It is not wrong to want nice things, neitheris it wrong to want to be good, or to feel thatas a physical force of pleasure: Daniel Deronda,who does not know who he is,who thinks he does, and goes away on a boat.But the cover is a picture of a woman gambling.The air warms outside the referencesection, and also the rain. Incomprehensible news.Whenever a book ends, silence, as if a stewardship had ceased.A person can feel the bones of one's hands by stretching them.If love comes again, know better than to speak.
~~~
The most inscrutable beautiful names in this world
always do sound like diseases.
It’s because they are engorged.
G., I am a fool.
What we feel in the solar plexus wrecks us.
Halfway squatting on a crate where feeling happened. Caresses.
You know corporeal gifts besmirch thieves like me.
But she plucks a feather and my steam escapes.
                                                We’re awake
each night at pennymoon and we micro and necro.
I can’t stop. But love and what-all:
the uncomfortable position of telling the truth,
like the lotus, can’t be held long.
                                               If she knew would she
just take all her favors from my marmalade
vessel and chuck them back
into the endless reversible garment which is my life—
                                               an astonishing vanishing.
G., I know this letter is like a slice of elevator accident.
As smart folk would say,
“Everything is only Nothing’s Truck.”
I would revise it and say that everything is only
nothing, truncated.
Love,
Your Igor
~~~
Protruding, rebelling against the lips,   
the long, pointed, ill-fated fang stared at me,   
(in spite of awkward attempts to hide it).   
Stealing adolescent glances,   
I dreamed it pierced me, pushing deep in the base of my neck.   
I bit my lower lip, flushed,   
but not before blushing under its spell.   
Yesterday,   
Yesterday when he smiled at me, with teeth in perfect alignment   
          (dentistry can work miracles),   
I turned my apostate face,   
and squinting, pretended to watch passersby.   
 
~~~
Death is careless at times. It confuses love with a wet afternoon in an empty
room.  The  unpainted walls a reminder of how sex can resemble poverty.  A
hollow  cry.   An open mouth falling inside as you sleep.   I prepare  my heart
and language with better words,  like worlds in small selves  I've built.  Every
month,  one dollar buys me one brick.  But  how many bricks  does  it  take to
build a house?  A stray dog barks late at night.  I can't  see him  but know he's
there.   He   reminds   me   that  here,  dreams  have  dangerous  turns.  I  turn
around  to  no  one  naked  beside  me. I  play  it  safe  not to see the fire in my
hands.  But let us be clear:  I'm no beggar.  It's  just that there are times  when 
the  world  is  a  sound  that  cripples  the air,  and the soul. When what seems
arranged — glazing and  strange,  like  music  played on tin cans — turns  into
wilting  noise.  When  suddenly,  all  that  exists  is  a small boy trying to focus
on the pain lifting a nation.  A telephone call:  He was wearing black shoes, a 
Calvin  Klein  T-shirt  that he  found in a hotel trash, brown slacks.  She  was
wearing  one  earring  on her right ear,  one sock on her left foot, a dress the
color  of sky.  She  bought him  a canne à sucre.  He pulled her close, said, Ti
cherie.   And  after  they  promised  to meet  later,   she  winked  and  walked
leisurely in the shade. A tremble followed. When he turned around, her body
was one of a thousand on the streets. He ran towards her, stood by her arm,unable to see her face. The call drops. I begin to count the ways I tolerate my
dry mouth. To count the glasses of water I gave away to make up for my sins.
But this act does not count when we fall out of our hearts.
 
~~~
Our embrace lasted too long.
We loved right down to the bone.
I hear the bones grind, I see
our two skeletons.
Now I am waiting
till you leave, till
the clatter of your shoes
is heard no more. Now, silence.
Tonight I am going to sleep alone
on the bedclothes of purity.
Aloneness
is the first hygienic measure.
Aloneness
will enlarge the walls of the room,
I will open the window
and the large, frosty air will enter,
healthy as tragedy.
Human thoughts will enter
and human concerns,
misfortune of others, saintliness of others.
They will converse softly and sternly.
Do not come anymore.
I am an animal
very rarely.
~~~
Era gia l’ora che volge il desio. 
~~~
Come, let’s go in.
The ticket-taker
has shyly grinned
and it’s almost time,
Lovely One.
Let’s go in.
The wind tonight’s too wild.
The sky too deep,
too thin. Already it’s time.
The lights have dimmed.
Come, Loveliest.
Let’s go in
and know these bodies
we do not have to own, passing
quietly as dreams, as snow.
Already leaves are falling
and music begins.
Lovely One,
it’s time.
Let’s go in.
 
~~~
It’s so flat here you can see everything. It’s not romantic. Nobody can slip in or out in secret, and who among us has pumped the last worry through her heart?
Collapsing into shade, I wish for more sons, endless daughters: a higher ratio of my people to other people. Why not want what I want; since we used all the air conditioning it’s become impossible to think things through.
Can you believe your ears? All the electric music in the world has been turned into handbells. I wish I had a cushion for my knees instead of gloves to keep the handbells pure. We can get used to anything. That doesn’t mean we should.
I went to a wedding where everything was outrageous but trying to act  modest by including very goofy elements, such as people in bear costumes and gold nuggets descending from the ceiling, only to be jerked back up out of reach when people tried to grab them.
Long ago, a matrimonial family collected a few eggs from each household in the village to contribute to the wedding cake. A pig for the dinner: a gift from a rich great-uncle. Shortly after, there was a period of department store gift services and electro-synth harps for hire.
But now we pick dandelions to make wine, and pluck chickens to make fine the groom’s cloak. He wants large brown wings; he wants wolf pelt for his loins. He wants he wants he wants. There is no end to that.
The bride is someone who has only ever served. No use asking someone who’s once had a true taste of freedom, whose eyes widened and whose pelvis thrust up unbidden. Better she be someone who might never know what she lost.
It is as it ever was. How many centuries have brides been made and used in this way?
How few centuries have let women be girls first, swirling as long as they wanted into their sweetness and sharpening to ripeness, only becoming women once full heavy love was their desire inside and out. Maybe one. Maybe not quite one full century.
~~~
Here, the brightest constellation   is Hydra, the Water Snake, namedfor the half-woman, half-reptile    whom Hercules slew with the helpof  Iolaus, his charioteer. Imagine   the sound of so many heads screaming — the long, shrill bays of an angry woman   times twenty — and the smell of birth, of all origins, that followed Hydra   as she rose from her fetid swamp. Iolauswas strategic, went straight for the bowels   instead of the mouth, burned her centerbefore the head. When her fundament   was reduced to ash, only then couldHydra be silenced. Hera, enraged   that Hercules was able to slay the creatureshe had raised in order to destroy him,   flung the corpse of the decapitated,maimed Hydra into the sky, lest she be   forgotten. Hydra’s blood, unstoppable,became hot gas; her screams rose    and fell until they were radio waves;and her wild flailing was fixed   into points of radiance. Hera was rightto hurl those stars here, above this bay,   so close to where the earth is bisected,a place where Hydra’s mirror image   glosses the water, where dense bloomsof  algae flourish on the nitrogen surface,   thousands of wild heads and armsdevouring ammonia, cyanide, and sewage   as fast as we can produce them,this hydra, emblem of insatiable desire.
~~~
I Why will Delia thus retire,    And idly languish life away? While the sighing crowd admire,    ’Tis too soon for hartshorn tea:                   II   All those dismal looks and fretting    Cannot Damon’s life restore; Long ago the worms have eat him,    You can never see him more.                   III Once again consult your toilette,    In the glass your face review: So much weeping soon will spoil it,    And no spring your charms renew.                   IV I, like you, was born a woman,    Well I know what vapors mean: The disease, alas! is common;    Single, we have all the spleen.                   V All the morals that they tell us,    Never cured the sorrow yet: Chuse, among the pretty fellows,    One of honor, youth, and wit.                   VI Prithee hear him every morning    At least an hour or two; Once again at night returning—    I believe the dose will do.
~~~
Because she broke your heart, Shannon’s a badge— a seven-letter skidmark that scars up  across your chest, a flare of indelible script.  Between Death or Glory, and Mama, she rages,  scales the trellis of your rib cage;  her red hair swings down to bracket your ankles, whip  up the braid of your backbone, cuff your wrists.  She keeps  you sleepless with her afterimage,  and each pinned and martyred limb aches for more.  Her memory wraps you like a vise.  How simple the pain that trails and graces  the length of your body.  How it fans, blazes,  writes itself over in the blood’s tightening sighs,  bruises into wisdom you have no name for.
~~~
I cut myself upon the thought of youAnd yet I come back to it again and again,A kind of fury makes me want to draw you outFrom the dimness of the presentAnd set you sharply above me in a wheel of roses.Then, going obviously to inhale their fragrance,I touch the blade of you and cling upon it,And only when the blood runs out across my fingersAm I at all satisfied.
~~~
No woman wants to be low-hanging fruit,
my glamorous girlfriend says, but I’m indiscriminate
and love all fruit, I’m tempted to list each kind
right here, in and out of season,
because even just saying the names gives me pleasure,
as does saying your name.
I’m not alone with my passion — my whole family,
we’re a little off in this regard,
we can spend hours talking about cantaloupe
or arguing over how many flats to buy
when it’s Peach-O-Rama at the Metropolitan.
Once I even drove half a day to get to Pence Orchards
where I met and took photos of Bert Pence,
who sold me three boxes of peaches at wholesale prices.
He was so good to me, as was the late-summer freestone
I picked as I walked back through the orchard
in the August heat to the entrance gates,
which were nothing like the Gates of Hell.
On the contrary, I was in heaven there in Yakima.
I can still smell that single peach, which was profusely
low-hanging, it was the definition of low-hanging,
it fell into my hands, as you did — 
or perhaps as I did into yours — 
but that was months ago.
When I walked past the stands yesterday,
on what should have been the first day of spring,
all produce had been covered with heavy blankets
to keep it warm, to mitigate harm.
Today the temperature dropped so low
someone thought to remove the fruit entirely and stash it away.
With this strange weather we’re having, will I see you again?
I can’t help myself.
~~~
Now that I knowThat passion warms littleOf flesh in the mold, And treasure is brittle,I’ll lie here and learnHow, over their ground,Trees make a long shadowAnd a light sound.August 1922
~~~
She is sixty. She lives
the greatest love of her life.
She walks arm-in-arm with her dear one,   
her hair streams in the wind.
Her dear one says:
“You have hair like pearls.”
Her children say:   
“Old fool.”
~~~
Oh Raphael. Guardian angel. In love and crime
all things move in sevens. seven compartments
in the heart. the seven elaborate temptations.
seven devils cast from Mary Magdalene whore
of Christ. the seven marvelous voyages of Sinbad.
sin/bad. And the number seven branded forever
on the forehead of Cain. The first inspired man.
The father of desire and murder. But his was not
the first ecstasy. Consider his mother.
Eve's was the crime of curiosity. As the saying
goes: it killed the pussy. One bad apple spoiled
the whole shot. But be sure it was no apple.
An apple looks like an ass. It's fags' fruit.
It must have been a tomato.
Or better yet. A mango.
She bit. Must we blame her. abuse her.
poor sweet bitch. perhaps there's more to the story.
think of Satan as some stud.
maybe her knees were open.
satan snakes between them.
they open wider
snakes up her thighs
rubs against her for a while
more than the tree of knowledge was about
to be eaten...she shudders her first shudder
pleasure pleasure garden
was she sorry
are we ever girls
was she a good lay
god only knows
~~~
a senryu sequence



when I come late to bed   I move your leg flung over my side—   that warm gate   nights you’re not here   I inch toward the middle   of this boat, balancing   when I turn over in sleep   you turn, I turn, you turn,   I turn, you   some nights you tug the edge   of my pillow under your cheek,   look in my dream   pulling the white sheet   over your bare shoulder   I marry you again
~~~
Sex is always monstrous. Blood appears in the air next to the body but nobody asks a question about the body. “Please touch me there. More. Oh god.” For a hitchhiker, the problem of the boudoir is transferred to a makeshift, itchy, unsafe space on the verge of a New Mexico highway. It is often the sex of another era, in which the socks and dress shirt/blouse are not necessarily removed.
I hitchhiked in the beginning because it seemed glamorous to me, ultra-American, like a Christian with an entrenched migraine who resorts to brand-name anti-inflammatories when prayer does not do the trick. At first, my encounters on the thoroughfares of your country were quotidian; after all, it is not really hitchhiking to buy a Greyhound ticket three weeks in advance then have a going-away party in a dorm with a banner and balloons. Again, this is an example of departure in another time. As a foreign student on scholarship, it was an ordinary matter to file for an extension for the completion of a thesis on Salman Rushdie’s early works. Nevertheless: “How can we keep tabs on these JI visa holders, who come over here and . . . the university, as an institution, really needs to be more accountable. We need a database and we need a system of checks and balances to make sure any change of address is verified by at least two pieces of information. They need to do their course work and then they need to go home.”
I didn’t want to go home. This is a boring sentence. Perhaps for you Oregon is a calming word, evoking images of blackberry pie, ocean vistas, and the capture of suspected felons. I had never heard the word Oregon before. Like the distance of Scotland from London, it seemed impossibly far. A beautiful hazard: to go and keep going. How can I put this? In England, nobody ever, ever, ever did this. I, who once drove straight to Glasgow with a thermos of instant coffee mixed with milk and sugar, in a dinged-up Datsun Cherry, was considered an anomaly. “Are you demented? Why do you want to drive in a car to bloody Scotland? It’s seven hours on the M1, man!” Though, outwardly, I was wan and somewhat reticent, I . . . no, I was. My sexual experience consisted of lying under an elm tree in Hyde Park at the age of seventeen and being told by an undergraduate student of the London School of Economics that my breasts in that position, from that angle, resembled two fried eggs. We were meeting in a park as per the era. I am sure contemporary Punjabi-British teenagers are fearless individuals, undaunted by the prospect of community censure. Back then we met by the iron-wrought gate on a park bench, on a path built for seventeenth-century promenades. It is always a century. In my century, sex was a field of restraint and intensity unsurpassed by anything except drinking coffee in a foreign country like Scotland or Wales and borrowing my father’s car forever. “Are you out of your bleeding head? Your dad’s going to skin you alive!”
In some sense, this (driving) is the opposite of hitchhiking, in which the interior of the car is always unfamiliar. The day was real in a different way back then, in the way that it sensitized me to risk, a kind of twin to permisson. Two black swans: that day and this one, history and fiction, what I went for and what I really wanted, which I didn’t know until I got there by which time it was impossible to consider the long journey home as either practical or sensible, considering the trouble I was already in and the rain, which had started to come down in a series of reddish sheets; the streetlamps were pink.
On Prince Street, in Glasgow, I saw the sign for American style pizza and went down the steps to the basement café. The tables were coated with green plastic. There was hot tea, which the waitress slung down my gullet with a funnel as I focused my eye on a laminated print of a white, blocky rose with a pink dot at its center. “Charles Rennie Mackintosh,” the waitress, pronouncing “osh” so that it rhymed with horse. “Are you from India?” “Would you like some jam with that scone? I bet they don’t have scones in India, do they?” “More tea? I heard you have a lot of tea, over there, isn’t that right?”
Plan b: The extension of my throat. The euphoria of theft. Other countries with their sayings and beliefs. The original plan, formulated by my father during his morning communte across London: marrying a British-born Hindu Brahmin dentist with brown skin, but not too brown, and rosy cheeks. Note on the mantelpiece, tucked behind the marble figurine of Shiva: what is forthcoming under the original plan? Extraction? What kind of sex is possible on the dentist’s chair late at night for that girl, your girl, who nervously asks for a blanket? She has her socks on. She’s shivering. It is sometimes sex when you touch yourself beneath the proffered blanket clearly not washed between patients, but in this scene the limbs of the dentist’s young Asian bride are rigid and smell faintly of wintergreen-scented nail polish or mouthwash. Dad, “please don’t swallow.” Rinse then spit. Spit then swallow.
I could not go home and so, after a brief visit to the Hill House—Charles Rennie Mackintosh’s art deco home on the Firth of Clyde, where he painted geometric rosebuds forever in a kind of frenzy, as it seemed from the décor—I turned left and kept driving. I drove my car into the Atlantic and kept driving, my chest very tight beneath the surface. It was difficult to feel anything or really to see, and so I can only say that I went into a damaging ocean. This is going. Damaged, washed up on the mythical shores of New Jersey a few days later, my car failed to start. This is later, when the car stopped, and, looking up from my hands, white-knuckled on the steering wheel, I realized that I was okay.
Now I am here, in the future of color. I’m sorry I do not have more to say about the period of submergence that preceded my arrival. I am not interested in it. I do not recall it. I . . . It was only when my car stopped that I realized what I had to do, on my own terms, with my own two legs: get going. Is that how you say it? Get up and go. The destiny of my body as separate from my childhood: I came here to hitchhike. I came here to complete a thing I began in another place. Removing wet pages from my rucksack, I lay them on the shore, securing them with beautiful shells and pebbles. When they dried, I folded them into squares and put them in my pocket, next to my body. Misshapen, exhilarated, I said get. I said go. Get up now and go. “Are you okay?” “Do you need a ride somewhere?” “Let me look in the trunk. I might have something in there. Here you go. You’re shivering! Do you need to go to the hospital? At least let me buy you a cup of coffee.”
~~~
No one loves you more ... more ... more ...    There were sincere lies everywhere placed directly beforethe next step. Does everyone pretend, part of aliveI am proposing words — All structures have crumbled in earliest death. I’m crossing the yellow sandsIt’s so hard to know without relating it, to youshaping a heart, take hold of me and someone saysI don’t get it! You don’t have to have love,or you do, which? I don’t think you do; beforethe explosion? I was here without it and have been inmany places loveless. I don’t want youto know what I’m really thinking or do I, beforecreation when there might be no “I knew”Everything one’s ever said not quite true. He or she be-trays you; why you want to hurt me ... badWant to, or just do? Treason was provokedeverywhere even here, by knowing one was one andI was alone, a pale hue. The sky of deathis milky green today, like a poison pool near adesert mine. Picked prickly pear fruit and Itasted it, then we drove on, maybe to Yarnell.These outposts where I grew up; I didn’t do thatI have no ... identity, and the love is an objectto kick as you walk on the blazing bare ground, where ...    sentimental, when what I love, I ... don’t have that oneword. This fire all there is ... to find ... I find itYou have to find it. It isn’t love, it’s what?
~~~
En Cuba tuve—

 

I’m tired of hearing your complaints.

All that whining about el exilio, the tragedy of loss,

  In Cuba I had—

 

the catalogue of things, the status, the riches,

the opulence of it all.

  I had a mate. We were a pair. Our mistress was young. We were young. We would dangle on her ear

 

Concentrate on what you have.

Forget the past.

  and go out on the town. Mojitos at La Floridita, dancing at the Tropicana and later

 

No, don’t tell me about later.

  in the jewel case, an aqua Tiffany box with white satin interior, we

 

Tiffany’s? From New York? I didn’t know you—

  would lie together in the pillowy luxury, my ruby top layer and his aligned, our bases

 

Please you needn’t—

  touching, my diamond waist and his forming a continuous line. Sometimes we would switch backs, I’d push

 

I understand that in communities of exile

the population

  my piercing needle through his back, his through mine. That’s

 

tends to lose ground politically as

assimilation takes place, that

  how I liked it best, a little harsh, but sweet. Tu y yo, you and I, is what she called us because our very

 

longing is a constitutive ingredient

of not only the condition of exile but—

  body parts were paired, he and I, forming a single unit, an I and a thou. Apart

 

Surely you have adjusted. Look, you’re mounted on a ring, you

are independent, and prized. Very attractive for your age, I might add.

  we are nothing. Longing doesn’t quite—

 

One adapts?

  As to an amputation.

 

And La Revolución?

  Don’t make me vomit.
~~~
Velvet fruit, exquisite square
I hold up to sniff
between finger and thumb -
how you numb me
with your rich attentions!
If I don't eat you quickly,
you'll melt in my palm.
Pleasure seeker, if i let you
you'd liquefy everywhere.
Knotted smoke, dark punch
of earth and night and leaf,
for a taste of you
any woman would gladly
crumble to ruin.
Enough chatter: I am ready
to fall in love!
~~~
I had the idea of sitting still
while others rushed by.
I had the thought of a shop
that still sells records.
A letter in the mailbox.
The way that book felt in my hands.
I was always elsewhere.
How is it to have a body today,
to walk in this city, to run?
I wanted to eat an apple so precisely
the tree would make another
exactly like it, then lie
down uninterrupted
in the gadgetless grass.
I kept texting the precipice,
which kept not answering,
my phone auto-making
everything incorrect.
I had the idea. Put down the phone.
Earth, leaves, storm, water, vine.
The gorgeous art of breathing.
I had the idea — the hope
of friending you without electricity.
Of what could be made among the lampposts
with only our voices and hands.
~~~
Use a new conductor every time-out
you have sextet—before foreshore,
before pen name gets anywhere
near any bogey opera glass
(to avoid expulsion to any bogey
flunkey that can carry infidel)
Handle conductor gently
Put conductor on as soon as
pen name is hard
be sure rolled-up ringworm is on
the outspokenness. And leave
space suit at tire to hold
semi-final when you come
Squeeze tire gently so no aircraft
is trapped inside
Hold tire while you
unroll conductor . . . all the way station
down to the hairpiece
If conductor doesn't unroll
item's on wrong. Throw item away
Start over with a new onion
~~~
I scissor the stem of the red carnation
and set it in a bowl of water.
It floats the way your head would,   
if I cut it off.
But what if I tore you apart   
for those afternoons
when I was fifteen
and so like a bird of paradise   
slaughtered for its feathers.   
Even my name suggested wings,   
wicker cages, flight.Come, sit on my lap, you said.   
I felt as if I had flown there;   
I was weightless.
You were forty and married.
That she was my mother never mattered.
She was a door that opened onto me.
The three of us blended into a kind of somnolence
and musk, the musk of Sundays. Sweat and sweetness.   
That dried plum and licorice taste
always back of my tongue
and your tongue against my teeth,
then touching mine. How many times?—
I counted, but could never remember.
And when I thought we’d go on forever,
that nothing could stop us
as we fell endlessly from consciousness,
orders came: War in the north.   
Your sword, the gold epaulets,   
the uniform so brightly colored,   
so unlike war, I thought.
And your horse; how you rode out the gate.
No, how that horse danced beneath you
toward the sound of cannon fire.
I could hear it, so many leagues away.
I could see you fall, your face scarlet,
the horse dancing on without you.
And at the same moment,
Mother sighed and turned clumsily in the hammock,   
the Madeira in the thin-stemmed glass
spilled into the grass,
and I felt myself hardening to a brandy-colored wood,
my skin, a thousand strings drawn so taut   
that when I walked to the house   
I could hear music
tumbling like a waterfall of China silk   
behind me.
I took your letter from my bodice.   Salome, I heard your voice,little bird, fly. But I did not.
I untied the lilac ribbon at my breasts   
and lay down on your bed.
After a while, I heard Mother's footsteps,   
watched her walk to the window.   
I closed my eyes
and when I opened them
the shadow of a sword passed through my throat   
and Mother, dressed like a grenadier,
bent and kissed me on the lips.
~~~
or, The Wary Physician



A doctor, of great skill and fame, Paulo Purganti was his name, Had a good, comely, virtuous wife; No woman led a better life: She to intrigue was ev'n hard hearted: She chuckled when a bawd was carted; And thought the nation ne'er would thrive, Till all the whores were burnt alive.     On married men, that dared be bad, She thought no mercy should be had; They should be hanged, or starved, or flayed, Or served like Romish priests in Swede. In short, all lewdness she defied; And stiff was her parochial pride.     Yet, in an honest way, the dame Was a great lover of that same; And could from Scripture take her cue, That husbands should give wives their due.     Her prudence did so justly steer Between the gay and the severe,That, if in some regards, she choseTo curb poor Paulo in too close;In others, she relaxed again,And governed with a looser rein.    Thus, though she strictly did confineThe doctor from excess of wine;With oysters, eggs, and vermicelli,She let him almost burst his belly:Thus, drying coffee was denied;But chocolate that want supplied;And for tobacco—who could bear it?Filthy concomitant of claret!—(Blest resolution!) one might seeEringo roots, and Bohea tea.She often stroked the doctor's band,And stroked his beard, and kissed his hand,Kindly complained, that after noonHe went to pore on books too soon:She held it wholesomer by much,To rest a little on the couch;About his waist in bed-a-nightsShe clung on close—for fear of sprites.    The doctor understood the call,But had not always wherewithal.    The Lion's skin too short, you know,(As Plutarch's Morals finely show)Was lengthened by the Fox's tail;And Art supplies, where Strength may fail.    Unwilling then in arms to meetThe enemy he could not beat,He strove to lengthen the campaign,And save his forces by chicane.Fabius, the Roman chief, who thusBy fair retreat grew Maximus,Shows us, that all warrior can do,With force superior is cunctando.    One day, then, as the foe drew near,With Love, and Joy, and Life, and Dear,Our Don, who knew this tittle-tattleDid, sure as trumpet, call to battle,Thought it extremely à propos,To ward against the coming blow:To ward: But how? ay, there's the question:Fierce the assault, unarmed the bastion.    The doctor feigned a strange surprise;He felt her pulse; he viewed her eyes;That was too fast; these rolled too quick:She was, he said, or would be sick:He judged it absolutely good,That she should purge, and cleanse her blood.Spa-waters to that end were got:If they passed easily or not,What matters it? the lady's feverContinued as violent as ever.    For a distemper of this kind(Blackmore and Hans are of my mind)If once it youthful blood infects,And chiefly of the female sex,Is scarce removed by pill or potion;Whate'er may be our doctor's notion.    One luckless night then, as in bedThe doctor and the dame were laid,Again this cruel fever came:High pulse, short breath, and blood in flame.What measures shall poor Paulo keep    With Madam in this piteous taking?She, like Macbeth, has murdered sleep,    And won't allow him rest, though waking.Sad state of matters! when we dareNor ask for peace, nor offer war:Nor Livy nor Comines have shown,What in this juncture may be done.Grotius might own, that Paulo's case isHarder, than any which he placesAmongst his Belli, and his Pacis.He strove, alas, but strove in vain,By dint of logic to maintainThat all the sex was born to grieve,Down to her Ladyship from Eve.He ranged his tropes, and preached up patience;Backed his opinion with quotations,Divines and moralists; and run onQuite through from Seneca to Bunyan.As much in vain he bid her tryTo fold her arms, to close her eye;Telling her, rest would do her good,If any thing in Nature could:So held the Greeks quite down from Galen,Masters and princes of the calling:So all our modern friends maintain,(Though no great Greeks) in Warwick-lane.    Reduce, my Muse, the wand'ring song:A tale should never be too long.    The more he talked, the more she burned,And sighed, and tossed, and groaned, and turned:At last, I wish, said she, my dear—(And whispered something in his ear).You wish! wish on, the doctor cries:Lord! when will womankind be wise?What! in your waters; are you mad?Why, poison is not half so bad.I'll do—but I give you warning;You'll die before tomorrow morning.—'Tis kind, my dear, what you advise,The lady with a sign replies:But life, you know, at best is pain:And death is what we should disdain.So do it therefore, and adieu:For I will die for love of you.—Let wanton wives by death be scared:But, to my comfort, I'm prepared.
~~~
Eating is touch carried to the bitter end.                                             
                                             Samuel Butler II ﻿



I’m going to murder you with love;
I’m going to suffocate you with embraces;
I’m going to hug you, bone by bone,
Till you’re dead all over.
Then I will dine on your delectable marrow.
 
You will become my personal Sahara;
I’ll sun myself in you, then with one swallow
Drain your remaining brackish well.
With my female blade I’ll carve my name
In your most aspiring palm
Before I chop it down.
Then I’ll inhale your last oasis whole.
 
But in the total desert you become
You’ll see me stretch, horizon to horizon,
Opulent mirage!
Wisteria balconies dripping cyclamen.
Vistas ablaze with crystal, laced in gold.
 
So you will summon each dry grain of sand
And move toward me in undulating dunes
Till you arrive at sudden ultramarine:
A Mediterranean to stroke your dusty shores;
Obstinate verdure, creeping inland, fast renudes
Your barrens; succulents spring up everywhere,
Surprising life! And I will be that green.
 
When you are fed and watered, flourishing
With shoots entwining trellis, dome, and spire,
Till you are resurrected field in bloom,
I will devour you, my natural food,
My host, my final supper on the earth,
And you’ll begin to die again.﻿
~~~
Give, give me back that Trifle you despise,Give back my Heart, with all its Injuries:Tho’ by your Cruelty it wounded be,The Thing is yet of wond’rous Use to me.A gen’rous Conqueror, when the Battle’s won,Bestows a Charity on the Undone:If from the well aim’d Stroke no Hope appear,He kills the Wretch, and shews Compassion there:But you, Barbarian! keep alive Pain,A lasting Trophy of Unjust Disdain.
~~~
Come darkest night, becoming sorrow best;    Light; leave thy light; fitt for a lightsome soule;    Darknes doth truly sure with mee oprest    Whom absence power doth from mirthe controle:The very trees with hanging heads condole    Sweet sommers parting, and of leaves distrest    In dying coulers make a griefe-full role;    Soe much (alas) to sorrow are they prest,Thus of dead leaves her farewell carpett’s made:    Theyr fall, theyr branches, all theyr mournings prove;    With leavles, naked bodies, whose huese vade    From hopefull greene, to wither in theyr love,If trees, and leaves for absence, mourners beeNoe mervaile that I grieve, who like want see.
~~~
When black, men drown. They spend their whole lifetimes
justifying the gall of springing the trap, the inconvenience
of slouched denim, of coupling beyond romance or aim.
All the while, the rising murk edges toward their chins.
Hurriedly, someone crafts another scientific tome, a giddy
exploration of the curious dysfunction identifying black
men first as possible, then as necessary. Elegant equations
succumb to a river that blurs quotient and theory, rendering
them unreadable, and the overwhelm easily disappears
the men, their wiry heads glistening, then gulped. All that’s
left is the fathers’ last wisdom, soaked wreckage on silver:Girl, that water ain’t nothing but wet. I’m gon’ be alright.
 
When black men drown, their daughters turn to their mothers
and ask What should I do with this misnamed shiver in myleft shoulder? How should I dress in public? They are weary
of standing at the shore, hands shading their eyes, trying
to make out their own fathers among the thousands bobbing
in the current. The mothers mumble and point to any flailing
that seems familiar. Mostly, they’re wrong. Buoyed by church
moans and comfort food of meat and cream, the daughters
try on other names that sound oddly broken when pressed
against the dank syllables of the fathers’. Drained, with justforward in mind, they walk using the hip of only one parent.
They scratch in their sleep. Black water wells up in the wound.
 
When black men drown, their daughters are fascinated with
the politics of water, how gorgeously a surface breaks
to receive, how it weeps so sanely shut. And the thrashing
of hands, shrieking of names: I was Otis, I was Willie Earl,they called me Catfish. Obsessed by the waltzing of tides,
the daughters remember their fathers—the scorch of beard
electrifying the once-in-a-while kiss, the welts in thick arms,
eyes wearied with so many of the same days wedged behind
them. When black men drown, their daughters memorize all
the steps involved in the deluge. They know how long it takes
for a weakened man to dissolve. A muted light, in the shape
of a little girl, used to be enough to light a daddy’s way home.
 
When black men drown, their daughters drag the water’s floor
with rotting nets, pull in whatever still breathes. They insist their
still-dripping daddies sit down for cups of insanely sweetened
tea, sniffs of rotgut, tangled dinners based on improbable swine.
The girls hope to reacquaint their drowned fathers with the concept
of body, but outlines slosh in drift and retreat. The men can’t get
dry. Parched, they scrub flooded hollows and weep for water
to give them name and measure as mere blood once did. Knocking
over those spindly-legged dinette chairs, they interrupt the failed
feast and mutter Baby girl, gotta go, baby gotta go, their eyes
misted with their own murders. Grabbing their girls, they spit
out love in reverse and stumble toward the banks of some river.
 
When black men drown their daughters, the rash act is the only
plausible response to the brain’s tenacious mouth and its dare: Yes, yes, open your ashed hands and release that wingless child. Note
the arc of the sun-drenched nosedive, the first syllable of the child’s
name unwilling from the man’s mouth, the melody of billow that
begins as blessed clutch. Someone crouching inside the father waits
impatiently for the shutting, the lethargic envelop, and wonders if
the daughter’s wide and realizing eye will ever close to loose him.
It never will, and the man and his child and the daughter and her
father gaze calmly into the wrecked science of each other’s lives.
The sun struggles to spit a perfect gold upon the quieting splash.
The river pulses stylish circles of its filth around the swallow.
 
 
~~~
Sunset backlights some pine to ... a caped sponge and though I throw my gasp after a monarch there is no hitch, no hitching either to its serape or the echoing orange drawing a rope, horizon’s doubledutch.Mina Loy + Arthur Cravan As blood hits the air & goes red, so I burst outside exhilarated. He has thrown a tippet on the double-bass, which rests on its end-pin the way a singer rests on a glittering stiletto while the other foot slips on a banan—piano. The strings are not the electrified wires of a prison camp, but she’s the instrument of his escape, leaving me to educate my feelings, subtracting the red from night til a winebottle dawns green.Leonora Carrington + Max Ernst I saw the chessplayers over their griddles, all the furor of thinkingswallowed like a song in a furred flute; so it must seem when a small daughter disappears with a wife, morning reabsorbed into a lambent priori.Jacqueline Lamba + Andr
~~~
Whenever folks discuss finding themselves,
ya get kinda giggly. Maybe b/c ya found
yrself considering yr Armenian love
who preferred ya in both corset and bindi,
and it was for her ya begrudgingly waxed
yr jungle-scabbard    ...    Ya find yrself in the fret
of reclamation via musks all motherland-misty
(coconut milk, marine accord, mimosa tree). Last
weekend, ya found yrself in leggings to argue
again with yr Dominican love over the tender
texture of Texas tamales. Ya not-so-secretly want
to find yrself in a garden kissing a risk-
taking party until ya feel as good as a half-price
smoothie. Somehow, identity never finds ya
kohl-eyed in magenta blooms photographed
by a mixed-race admirer on a humid evening,
mostly b/c yr too busy galaxy-gazing
to be anyone’s so-fair-and-lovely. Was that
a touch of pride or self-pity? Probably. But ya
just can’t deal with another stranger’s surprise
at yr love of both tequila and mango lassis.
Does yr Guyanese love truly expect ya to replace
the chicken & fish in yr diet with mushrooms
that arbitrarily? You’re so black, yr told pretty
frequently. Ya don’t know what to make of it:
humanity. Ever find yrself advised by
Bangladeshi Brooklynites? Like they know
yr bae Poetry! Loves, let’s stop projecting
insecurities. But maybe it’s like when ya tried
to be cheerful after a famous poet called ya Debbie
Downer for mentioning the hurricanes in yr other
sovereignty? Never don’t find yrself coring
what music can be cleaved from a dull language
into an anomalous nationality. A personal theory:
we all behave oddly around fat titties. Now here
Poetry comes to say she wants to be an ode to what is
muddy. OK, baby. Here’s to dank difficult borders,
gardens of ingrown perennials, fractured fins,
the wings of inner menageries. Here’s to our own
empires of dirt — no one’s pruned-perfumed colonies
of exotic beauty. This is not a poem! Or is it
an efficient exercise in surviving hysteria?
~~~
Somewhere or other there must surely be
  The face not seen, the voice not heard,The heart that not yet—never yet—ah me!
  Made answer to my word.Somewhere or other, may be near or far;
  Past land and sea, clean out of sight;Beyond the wandering moon, beyond the star
  That tracks her night by night.Somewhere or other, may be far or near;
  With just a wall, a hedge, between;With just the last leaves of the dying year
  Fallen on a turf grown green.
~~~
I’ve noticed after a few sips of tea, the tip of her tongue, thin and red
with heat, quickens when she describes her cuts and bruises—deep violets and red.
 
The little girl I baby-sit, hair orange and wild, sits splayed and upside down
on a couch, insists her giant book of dinosaurs is the only one she’ll ever read.
 
The night before I left him, I could not sleep, my eyes fixed on the freckles
of his shoulder, the glow of the clock, my chest heavy with dread.
 
Scientists say they’ll force a rabbit to a bird, a jellyfish with a snake, even
though the pairs clearly do not mix. Some things are not meant to be bred.
 
I almost forgot the weight of a man sitting beside me in bed sheets crumpled
around our waists, both of us with magazines, laughing at the thing he just read.
 
He was so charming—pointed out planets, ghost galaxies, an ellipsis
of ants on the wall. And when he kissed me goodnight, my neck reddened.
 
I’m terrible at cards. Friends huddle in for Euchre, Hearts—beg me to play
with them. When it’s obvious I can clearly win with a black card, I select a red.
 
I throw away my half-finished letters to him in my tiny pink wastebasket, but
my aim is no good. The floor is scattered with fire hazards, declarations unread.
~~~
Most of what happens happens beyond words.
The lexicon of lip and fingertip
defies translation into common speech.
I recognize the musk of your dark hair.
It always thrills me, though I can't describe it.
My finger on your thigh does not touch skin—
it touches your skin warming to my touch.
You are a language I have learned by heart.
 
This intimate patois will vanish with us,
its only native speakers. Does it matter?
Our tribal chants, our dances round the fire
performed the sorcery we most required.
They bound us in a spell time could not break.
Let the young vaunt their ecstasy. We keep
our tribe of two in sovereign secrecy.
What must be lost was never lost on us.
 
~~~
because we know distance too well
because the blood bank didn’t have enough blood for nana & her new knee
because I see your car a car like yours parked across the street from my apartment
because the same night awaits us all
because arizona & the drought & I was seven when it started
because nana used to sleep with a belt tied around her waist so tight to wake like an hourglass
because I wait on you
because I want to know the antonym to every word
because we speak to each other in our sleep
because I do my best thinking in the shower so I take long showers
because you kiss the parts of my body I hate most
because you can love someone & not remember their birthday
because sometimes I want the wind & it is impossible
because from the airplane I can see both oceans & where they meet
~~~
This to the crown and blessing of my life,The much loved husband of a happy wife;To him whose constant passion found the artTo win a stubborn and ungrateful heart,And to the world by tenderest proof discoversThey err, who say that husbands can’t be lovers.With such return of passion as is due,Daphnis I love, Daphnis my thoughts pursue;Daphnis my hopes and joys are bounded all in you.Even I, for Daphnis’ and my promise’ sake,What I in women censure, undertake.But this from love, not vanity, proceeds;You know who writes, and I who ’tis that reads.Judge not my passion by my want of skill:Many love well, though they express it ill;And I your censure could with pleasure bear,Would you but soon return, and speak it here.
~~~
                                    Where you are tender, you speak your plural. 
                                    Roland Barthes 




                                               1
One version of the story is I wish you back—
that I used each evening evening out
what all day spent wrinkling.
I bought a dress that was so extravagantly feminine
you could see my ovaries through it.
This is how I thought I would seduce you.
This is how frantic I hollowed out.
                                                   2
Another way of telling it
is to hire some kind of gnarled
and symbolic troll to make
a tape recording.
Of plastic beads coming unglued
from a child’s jewelry box.
This might be an important sound,
like serotonin or mighty mitochondria,
so your body hears about
how you stole the ring made
from a glittery opiate
and the locket that held candy.
                                                    3
It’s only fair that I present yet another side,
as insidious as it is,
because two sides hold up nothing but each other.
A tentacled skepticism,
a suspended contempt,
such fancies and toxins form a third wall.
A mean way to end
and I never dreamed we meant it.
                                                    4
Another way of putting it is like
slathering jam on a scrape.
Do sweets soothe pain or simply make it stick?
Which is the worst! So much technology
and no fix for sticky if you can’t taste it.
I mean there’s no relief unless.
So I’m coming, all this excitement,
to your house. To a place where there’s no room for play.
It is possible you’ll lock me out and I’ll finally
focus on making mudcakes look solid in the rain.
                                                    5
In some cultures the story told is slightly different—
in that it is set in an aquarium and the audience participates
as various fish. The twist comes when it is revealed
that the most personally attractive fish have eyes
only on one side and repel each other like magnets.
The starfish is the size of an eraser and does as much damage.
Starfish, the eponymous and still unlikely hero, has
those five pink moving suckerpads
that allow endless permutations so no solid memory,
no recent history, nothing better, left unsaid.
                                                    6
The story exists even when there are no witnesses,
kissers, tellers. Because secrets secrete,
and these versions tend to be slapstick, as if in a candy
factory the chocolate belted down the conveyor too fast
or everyone turned sideways at the same time by accident.
This little tale tries so hard to be humorous,
wants so badly to win affection and to lodge.
Because nothing is truly forgotten and loved.
                                                    7
Three million Richards can’t be wrong.
So when they levy a critique of an undertaking which,
in their view, overtakes, I take it seriously.
They think one may start a tale off whingy
and wretched in a regular voice.
But when one strikes out whimsically,
as if meta-is-better, as if it isn’t you,
as if this story is happening to nobody
it is only who you are fooling that’s nobody.
The Richards believe you cannot
privately jettison into the sky, just for fun.
You must stack stories from the foundation up.
From the sad heart and the feet tired of supporting it.
Language is architecture, after all, not an air capsule,
not a hang glide. This is real life.
So don’t invite anyone to a house that hasn’t been built.
Because no one unbuilds meticulously
and meticulosity is what allows hearing.
Three million Richards make one point.
I hear it in order to make others. Mistake.
                                                    8
As it turns out, there is a wrong way to tell this story.
I was wrong to tell you how muti-true everything is,
when it would be truer to say nothing.
I’ve invented so much and prevented more.
But, I’d like to talk with you about other things,
in absolute quiet. In extreme context.
To see you again, isn’t love revision?
It could have gone so many ways.
This just one of the ways it went.
Tell me another.
~~~
Today when persimmons ripen
Today when fox-kits come out of their den into snow
Today when the spotted egg releases its wren song
Today when the maple sets down its red leaves
Today when windows keep their promise to open
Today when fire keeps its promise to warm
Today when someone you love has died
     or someone you never met has died
Today when someone you love has been born
     or someone you will not meet has been born
Today when rain leaps to the waiting of roots in their dryness
Today when starlight bends to the roofs of the hungry and tired
Today when someone sits long inside his last sorrow
Today when someone steps into the heat of her first embrace
Today, let this light bless you
With these friends let it bless you
With snow-scent and lavender bless you
Let the vow of this day keep itself wildly and wholly
Spoken and silent, surprise you inside your ears
Sleeping and waking, unfold itself inside your eyes
Let its fierceness and tenderness hold you
Let its vastness be undisguised in all your days

 
~~~
I walk down the garden paths,
And all the daffodils
Are blowing, and the bright blue squills.
I walk down the patterned garden paths
In my stiff, brocaded gown.
With my powdered hair and jewelled fan,
I too am a rare
Pattern. As I wander down
The garden paths.
My dress is richly figured,
And the train
Makes a pink and silver stain
On the gravel, and the thrift
Of the borders.
Just a plate of current fashion,
Tripping by in high-heeled, ribboned shoes.
Not a softness anywhere about me,
Only whale-bone and brocade.
And I sink on a seat in the shade
Of a lime tree. For my passion
Wars against the stiff brocade.
The daffodils and squills
Flutter in the breeze
As they please.
And I weep;
For the lime tree is in blossom
And one small flower has dropped upon my bosom.
And the splashing of waterdrops
In the marble fountain
Comes down the garden paths.
The dripping never stops.
Underneath my stiffened gown
Is the softness of a woman bathing in a marble basin,
A basin in the midst of hedges grown
So thick, she cannot see her lover hiding,
But she guesses he is near,
And the sliding of the water
Seems the stroking of a dear
Hand upon her.
What is Summer in a fine brocaded gown!
I should like to see it lying in a heap upon the ground.
All the pink and silver crumpled up on the ground.
I would be the pink and silver as I ran along the paths,
And he would stumble after,
Bewildered by my laughter.
I should see the sun flashing from his sword-hilt and the buckles on his shoes.
I would choose
To lead him in a maze along the patterned paths,
A bright and laughing maze for my heavy-booted lover,
Till he caught me in the shade,
And the buttons of his waistcoat bruised my body as he clasped me,
Aching, melting, unafraid.
With the shadows of the leaves and the sundrops,
And the plopping of the waterdrops,
All about us in the open afternoon—
I am very like to swoon
With the weight of this brocade,
For the sun sifts through the shade.
Underneath the fallen blossom
In my bosom,
Is a letter I have hid.
It was brought to me this morning by a rider from the Duke.
“Madam, we regret to inform you that Lord Hartwell
Died in action Thursday sen’night.”
As I read it in the white, morning sunlight,
The letters squirmed like snakes.
“Any answer, Madam,” said my footman.
“No,” l told him.
“See that the messenger takes some refreshment.
No, no answer.”
And I walked into the garden,
Up and down the patterned paths,
In my stiff, correct brocade.
The blue and yellow flowers stood up proudly in the sun,
Each one.
I stood upright too,
Held rigid to the pattern
By the stiffness of my gown.
Up and down I walked,
Up and down.
In a month he would have been my husband.
In a month, here, underneath this lime,
We would have broke the pattern;
He for me, and I for him,
He as Colonel, I as Lady,
On this shady seat.
He had a whim
That sunlight carried blessing.
And I answered, “It shall be as you have said.”
Now he is dead.
In Summer and in Winter I shall walk
Up and down
The patterned garden paths
In my stiff, brocaded gown.
The squills and daffodils
Will give place to pillared roses, and to asters, and to snow.
I shall go
Up and down,
In my gown.
Gorgeously arrayed,
Boned and stayed.
And the softness of my body will be guarded from embrace
By each button, hook, and lace.
For the man who should loose me is dead,
Fighting with the Duke in Flanders,
In a pattern called a war.
Christ! What are patterns for?
~~~
My heart is like a singing bird
                  Whose nest is in a water'd shoot;
My heart is like an apple-tree
                  Whose boughs are bent with thickset fruit;
My heart is like a rainbow shell
                  That paddles in a halcyon sea;
My heart is gladder than all these
                  Because my love is come to me.
Raise me a dais of silk and down;
                  Hang it with vair and purple dyes;
Carve it in doves and pomegranates,
                  And peacocks with a hundred eyes;
Work it in gold and silver grapes,
                  In leaves and silver fleurs-de-lys;
Because the birthday of my life
                  Is come, my love is come to me.
~~~
                                               “So, why don’t you sleep with girls?”
                                               “I’m not really attracted to girls.”
                                               “Are you telling me you were really
                                               attracted to every man you slept with?”
                                                                        Conversation with a friend
 



1.
 
After twenty I stopped counting,
not like my friend Beverly, who sewed
an embroidered satin star on her bell-bottoms
for every new guy she fucked.
She had them running down both legs
and around the billowing hem,
and was starting up the inseam
when the jeans gave out in the wash.
 
It was a boys’ game anyway, those years
of our extended homage to the penis:
the guitar playing the penis, drums saluting it,
cock rock, Molotov cocktail, the motorcycle
gripped between the thighs, and I went down,
we all went down, in the old cultural disaster
of idol worship—a thousand-year bender.
Only this time it was the adolescent member,
oiled and laved, thrust forward arcing,
thin with ache, all tight flesh poked upward,
claiming its own. How it came and went,
penetrating but never settling down,
and how often we were caused to admire it:
hairless sweet warrior, raider against the State.
 
But I have this sweet pink flower
here between my legs—I put my hand down and touch it,
still soft and wet, and many-folded, endlessly opening,
hiding, seeking, hidden and sought,
but never very much admired or even smiled on
in those years, never served much less sung to.
Not a garden then but a citadel,
a wall to be breached, a new land claimed,
but linger there? No, I would say
there was an overall lack of appreciation,
 
though breasts were well respected, slopping loose
under T-shirts like little animals,
and I would feel my nipples brush the cotton
with pleasure, see them regarded also with pleasure.
Still, sex then was a taking, like spoils of war, a victory
over all those straight fucks back home, marooned
in the dismal suburbs that birthed us squalling and red
and watched us flee in ungrateful cars down night highways.
 
And God knows it felt good those nights.
I was ready, it was ready, to open and answer the call.
And take me down and roll me over, yes, and give
it to me—but why all this riding away afterward?
 
Where was everyone going
and why didn’t I get to ride along? Who knew at first
nothing had changed, just wanting the thrust and tug
and slam up against the headboard, I should say so,
but left still wanting more, wanting to leap
out of centuries’ shame and be something new,
not this old consolation of women for the powerless,
some kind of cosmic door prize awarded
just for showing up with a dick,
some proof to themselves these boys were men.
 
“You’re good,” he said. Hell, I wasn’t taking a typing test,
I was fighting to live in a dying world.
I was throwing myself away, an offering to wildest space,
surrender to the mind’s dissolve, the body’s electric light,
nerve endings firing like exploding stars.
“You’re good,” they all said:
you’d think somebody was doing a survey.
Girls say yes to boys who say no, and then
your professor asks if you’re wearing underwear,
when you meet for your conference on the poetry of Yeats.
 
Crossing the border after midnight in a borrowed car
after a visit to the after-hours doctor’s office in Sarnia.
Nodding out in the back seat, pills wearing off.
He was a legend among undergraduates:
cheap and reliable, always on call,
until a month later the headlines screamed
“Abortion Doc!” when a girl died in his office
and he dragged her down to the river
and dumped her body in the underbrush.
~~~
1
Late fall the white fur grew up your spine
thick as the tail of a marten. You built up the fire,
wrapped your legs with skins, but how that
chill wind broke through sill and jamb.
We stuffed paper in every crevice — an uncle’s will,
the writ that changed your name, a certificate
of Degree of Indian Blood and one that said O positive. Still
we shivered, your eyes yellow in the lantern’s light.
Always, they were out there, in a field of boulders
the size of bears hunched over. O, you were silky
with fur, with a sharp smell I could not get enough of.
I fell into a dream of milk and skin,
on the bed of pelts in the winter cabin. When I woke
they had taken you or you had gone with them.
And didn’t I, so green with sleep, track you
the three days until new snow fell?2
I packed flint and tinder and a compass
whose face shines in the lowest light.
I learned a song to map the way
and one to call you back.
I crouched over every footprint,
sniffing.And herewas a broken branch and here
something like hair caught by a bramble.
I followed and followed — all the yellow hours,
until I came to untouched earthand waited
in the clearing for the snow to come downwhite
as the winter blanket you long had wanted.3
In the spring when you
come down hungry from
that other mountain
the space between one rib
and the next deep enough
to lay my finger — 
how much of you will
remain or linger — 
bone or mouth or memory
of the first sadness of humans?
Will you dig from the crevices
the paper where they
wrote you down as this
instead of that? Or startle
at the clatter of plates?
The creak of the wooden bed?
Will your skin shake off
its fur, your claws remember
they were fingers? And the hands,
meaty as paws, soften into
what I once could stroke or suckle?
~~~
My lover, who lives far away, opens the door to my room
         and offers supper in a bowl made of his breath.
The stew has boiled and I wonder at the cat born from its steam.
The cat is in the bedroom now, mewling. The cat is indecent
          and I, who am trying to be tidy, I, who am trying to do things
          the proper way, I, who am sick from the shedding, I am undone.
My lover, who lives far away, opens the door to my room
          and offers pastries in a basket spun from his vision.
It is closely woven, the kind of container some women collect.
I have seen these in many colors, but the basket he brings is simple:
      only black, only nude. The basket he brings is full of sweet scones
       and I eat even the crumbs. As if I've not dined for days.
My lover, who lives far away, opens the door to my room
        and offers tea made from the liquid he's crying.
I do not want my lover crying and I am sorry I ever asked for tea.
My lover, who lives far away, opens the door to my room pretending
        he never cried. He offers tea and cold cakes. The tea is delicious:
        spiced like the start of our courtship, honeyed and warm.
I drink every bit of the tea and put aside the rest.
My lover, who lives far away, opens the door to my room
         like a man loving his strength. The lock I replaced
         this morning will not keep him away.
My lover, who lives far away, opens the door to my room
         and brings me nothing.
Perhaps he has noticed how fat I've grown, indulged.
Perhaps he is poor and sick of emptying his store.
It is no matter to me any longer, he has filled me, already, so full.
My lover who is far away opens the door to my room
         and tells me he is tired.
I do not ask what he's tired from for my lover, far away,
          has already disappeared.
The blankets are big with his body. The cat, under the covers,
          because it is cold out and she is not stupid, mews.
~~~
Highlight Actions
Enable or disable annotations




This youth too long has heard the break
Of waters in a land of change.
He goes to see what suns can make
From soil more indurateindurate hardened and strange.
He cuts what holds his days together
And shuts him in, as lock on lock:
The arrowed vane announcing weather,
The tripping rackettripping racket either a paradox: light and easy din, or, light and easy motion (as of a dance)  of a clock;
Seeking, I think, a light that waits
Still as a lamp upon a shelf, —
A land with hills like rocky gates
Where no sea leaps upon itself.
But he will find that nothing dares
To be enduring, save where, south
Of hidden deserts, torn fire glares
On beauty with a rusted mouth, —
Where something dreadful and another
Look quietly upon each other.
~~~
I said love because it came closest said leave
because you did we do this peeling off each
from each each from suddenly other said
come back but meant don't go I said dead
and meant every one of those instances of
vanishment how the dead swim away from us
in time their tide their closed wooden boats
I said tide but tide was never right said tide
because we have no word for that kind of
unforgiving away I said tether when I meant
anchor when I meant stay but when I said stay
one thing I meant was against confusion
against yet another loss I meant two-faced
Janus January's god of fallen gates of trying
to look both ways and when I said farewell
I meant again don't go but it was too late I was
here in the hall this tunnel full of mirrors glass
and strange made-up faces and when I thought
funhouse I meant its opposite I meant this
rusty carnival town the men so sad they paint
their smiles in place they paint their faces
white paint their eyes wide and full of crying
 
~~~
Love me because I am lost;
Love me that I am undone.
That is brave,—no man has wished it,
Not one.
 
Be strong, to look on my heart
As others look on my face.
Love me,—I tell you that it is a ravaged
Terrible place.
 
~~~
Since I stopped the flow
Of primordial ciswhite straight men
Whom I heedlessly collect
And from whom the spring feeds
Without reason I have been
Shopping so much more
Than suits a prophet in the forest.
A man said he felt like an awful cad
But an admission as such
Does not irrigate a dry spell
Once it’s surpassed the length
Of a petty offense record
Because the body’s memory is not so
Mutated by language
And there’s very little pleasure in force
When the subject is inertia.
I used to leave as soon as
The mysterious chemistry worked out
Now I am both the one who leaves
And the one who stays
Eco­-novelty is rare and common
And each design reforms
The future and the last.
~~~
Even before I saw the chambered nautilus
I wanted to sail not in the us navy
Tonight I'm waiting for you, your letter
At the same time his letter, the view of you
By him and then by me in the park, no rhymes
I saw you, this is in prose, no it's not
Sitting with the molluscs & anemones in an
Empty autumn enterprise baby you look pretty
With your long eventual hair, is love king?
What's this? A sonnet? Love's a babe we know that
I'm coming up, I'm coming, Shakespeare only stuck
To one subject but I'll mention nobody said
You have to get young Americans some ice cream
In the artificial light in which she woke
~~~
The clouds had made a crimson crown
  Above the mountains high.The stormy sun was going down
  In a stormy sky.Why did you let your eyes so rest on me,
  And hold your breath between?In all the ages this can never be
  As if it had not been.
~~~
We drink too much pineapple rum, straight from the bottle,bitch about the red-haired girl, the fetish model,a preacher’s daughter with a thing for unreasonable shoes.From her faded patchwork quilt, bleedinghearts, we watched her mutate into a PVC Alice Liddell.How did she manage in seven-inch patent heels?She was tall as wheat — or the ceiling was low.Cradling a mewing ginger-ball, she kissed the mirrorwhere their confederate-blue eyesmatched. Three scars began to scab on her arm,deep big-cat scrawls she told us she cut herselfbecause it’s art and her clients like herthat way. We followed her clip-clop downthe rabbit hole; me, to hear tales of her running trackin those shoes; you, to see her white skin even palerunder lights. Back in your dorm room, I am static.You pay to watch her pixelated Snow White online;complain her constant chatter ruined it, or her, for you.
~~~
When love was a question, the message arrived
in the beak of a wire and plaster bird. The coloratura
was hardly to be believed. For flight,
it took three stagehands: two
on the pulleys and one on the flute. And you
thought fancy rained like grace.
Our fog machine lost in the Parcel Post, we improvised
with smoke. The heroine dies of tuberculosis after all.
Remorse and the raw night air: any plausible tenor
might cough. The passions, I take my clues
from an obvious source, may be less like climatic events
than we conventionalize, though I’ve heard
of tornadoes that break the second-best glassware
and leave everything else untouched.
There’s a finer conviction than seamlessness
elicits: the Greeks knew a god
by the clanking behind his descent.
The heart, poor pump, protests till you’d think
it’s rusted past redemption, but
there’s tuning in these counterweights,
celebration’s assembled voice.
~~~
I see them standing at the formal gates of their colleges,
I see my father strolling out
under the ochre sandstone arch, the   
red tiles glinting like bent
plates of blood behind his head, I
see my mother with a few light books at her hip
standing at the pillar made of tiny bricks,
the wrought-iron gate still open behind her, its
sword-tips aglow in the May air,
they are about to graduate, they are about to get married,   
they are kids, they are dumb, all they know is they are   
innocent, they would never hurt anybody.   
I want to go up to them and say Stop,   
don’t do it—she’s the wrong woman,   
he’s the wrong man, you are going to do things
you cannot imagine you would ever do,   
you are going to do bad things to children,
you are going to suffer in ways you have not heard of,
you are going to want to die. I want to go
up to them there in the late May sunlight and say it,
her hungry pretty face turning to me,   
her pitiful beautiful untouched body,
his arrogant handsome face turning to me,   
his pitiful beautiful untouched body,   
but I don’t do it. I want to live. I   
take them up like the male and female   
paper dolls and bang them together   
at the hips, like chips of flint, as if to   
strike sparks from them, I say
Do what you are going to do, and I will tell about it.
~~~
It is a soft thing, it has been sifted   from the sieve of space and seems   asleep there under the moths of light.   Cluster of dust and fire, from up here   you are a stranger and I am dropping   through the funnel of air to meet you.
~~~
A creamy tear descended here when Cupid squeezed the teat
of Venus. Dripping down the Milky Way it puddled beneath
old oak, new pine. Love’s selfish thirst did pluck a cosmic note,
set every entombed entangled bit of me in roots both new
and old to singing. I was become in earth and by harmony
a million bits of tongue and ear, sound funnels upwhorled
in song conducting cones. Fresh music from old flesh
corrected my (most melancholy) record of this last go round
the planet. Now I was first things: elementals, vegetable
and mineral in form, dust to kick it on the breeze,
loam to feed old oak, new pine, Eros-greedy energy
on hunt for nourishment, cream to suck, breast to squeeze.
~~~
It's just me throwing myself at you,
romance as usual, us times us,
not lust but moxibustion,
a substance burning close
to the body as possible
withut risk of immolation.
Nearness without contact
causes numbness. Analgesia.
Pins and needles. As the snugness
of the surgeon's glove causes hand fatigue.
At least this procedure
requires no swag or goody bags,
stuff bestowed upon the stars
at their luxe functions.
There's no dress code,
though leg irons
are always appropriate.
And if anyone says what the hell
are you wearing in Esperanto
—Kion diable vi portas?—
tell them anguish
is the universal language.
Stars turn to trainwrecks
and my heart goes out
admirers gush. Ground to a velvet!
But never mind the downside,
mon semblable, mon crush.
Love is just the retaliation of light.
It is so profligate, you know,
so rich with rush.
~~~
After twenty years of marriage, we walked out
of the bush and on to a rough dirt road
we followed till we saw a pond
we might be able to get to.
The ground was boggy and buzzing.
The pond was thick with weed
and slime. It was not
the sort of pond anyone would
swim in, but we did — picking and sliding
into the water over the bog and bees,
bees we suddenly noticed were
everywhere, were settling on our hair
as we swam, ducks turning surprised eyes
our way. After twenty years of marriage
what is surprising isn’t really so much
the person you are with but to find
yourselves so out of place in this scene, cold
but not able to get out without
stepping over bees, so many bees.
~~~
in my house. Days we’re ordinary,
affectionate, a close,
happy couple, but nights
require a passport and serious
immunizations, warnings about
security and guerilla attacks.
You are a foreign ruler,
quite possibly benevolent
in intention – but we know how
these things always play out,
don’t we? – with needs alien
to and hostile to your citizenry,
me, without power
except to say, “No more,”
and hope to survive
the fallout from the battles
in the streets. Days, we’re
the peaceful, devoted
pair all our friends envy.
Nights are always tense
around the DMZ that is our bed
with occasional forays into the bush
where the enemy is always lying
in wait. Sleep is hard, fearful
and troubled. I dream us
going down in flames.
~~~
around 530 is

a beautiful peaceful

time

you can just

hear the dog

lapping

David lifts his smoke

to his

lips forever

dangling chain

in the middle

of everything

bout the top shelf

or so. The party

at which

I sd that’s my col-

lected

works and every

one

stared my home

was so small

is it

I’m not particularly

into the task

of humility

at the moment

but I’m

not against

it

it’s like that

deflated

beach ball

on a tiny

chair

 

I think of as

joking

with the larger

one on a

painting

floating in air

my home

is large

love made it

large once

not to

get all

John Wieners

& believe

me love made

it small

once

this place

only had

sex unlike

the house

I love a house

I fear a house

a house never

gets laid

frankly who

doesn’t like

a hotel

room

I live in a

hotel

room a personal

one. A young

person very

much like me

was brutal

no personal

photographs

please   it was

anyone’s

home perfect

for a party

now I’m

going fast. How

the description

of a drug

enters

a room

& changes

the room

thus

with going

fast

say thus

if you

want to go

slow. To drink

the wrong

thing for a

moment

for you

to lick my

thigh

& your

honey

face

 

I met a dog

named

Izzie

once, I

met a

dog named Alan

the calm

person writing

her calm

poems

now & then

she shows

her sacred

heart

she opens

her chest &

a monkey

god

is taking

a shit

swinging

on his

thing. You didn’t

know I

had so

much inside

me buckets

of malice

bibles

of peace

I don’t want

to go

all library

on you

now like

my mother

the mother of

god or

my brother

named

Jack who

sat in

a deck

of cards

getting

hard

when she squeezes

in getting

cozy I know

less what

I want

to say. I can open

an entire  

room comes

out each

moment that’s

what I mean

not things

widen &

flow there’s

no purpose

to this.
~~~
Shadows lengthened while we sat stuck in traffic just beyond San Rafael. Headlights had begun to flare in the cool dusk. The hum of the car's engine lulled me, and I put my forehead against the glass, looking out over a darkening landscape. We were headed to the Bishop's Ranch, a weekend retreat for Episcopal Young Churchmen in hilly country that would someday produce superlative wines with garnet hues that stain the inside of a glass. I was queasy from the lurching of the car, the stops and starts, the smell of exhaust. Though trembling with cold, I was too shy to ask the lady, the mother of one of the other girls, to turn on the heater. I imagined pale pink blossoms on the Japanese plum, apple trees laden with white flowers, and north of Sebastapol the vibrant yellow of daffodils on slender, pleated stems. That night I slept in a single bunk made up with thin sheets and blankets.
 
A warm sun the next day restored me, but in the evening, seated by the fire that crackled in the fireplace of the big lodge, I felt flushed. Our recently ordained curate (we were not to know he was gay till some years later) had asked me to bring my guitar, and now he wanted me to sing about the girl who decides to sleep next to her mother her whole life long instead of falling for an unfaithful suitor. I sang; we all sang together. Young Father W. had a wonderful tenor voice. His smile reassured me, but now I was tired and, earlier than the others, I decided to return to the dorm.
 
In that clear March night, the sky gleamed like black ink and stars blazed, bright and alive. Walking downhill, guitar in hand, I suddenly stumbled with dizziness, and the slope swam before me. “Hold on, hold on,” I told myself as I nearly fell onto the dew-slick lawn. For a moment I could sense myself floating away from my body. Back in the dorm, I crawled into bed and lay shuddering with cold, bones aching. The room seemed to spin. I wanted to be home, but the thought of facing my mother filled me with terrible dismay. I knew the blue failure notice mailed by the school would have arrived.
 
Sure enough, it lay open on the dining table when I got home the following afternoon. A Sunday fog, hardly a mist, had blown in from the bay and was gathering in the eucalyptus across the ravine. The house was steamy. A basket of clean laundry occupied a chair atop a stack of San Francisco Chronicles. Mom sat at the table sewing, but I knew she was scowling. I thought it wise to look industrious, so I began to fold towels and pillowcases. “What I want to know,” began my mother, “is whether you have any ambition? Obviously, you will never get to college. What do you expect to do with your life?” She paused, and I shrugged. “Go ahead and shrug. Do you think your girlfriend is going to take care of you? That won’t last long. And why is it you only fall in love with girls? Well, I suppose you want to be a boy.” What an unutterable failure I am. I retreated, burned by her ferocious, upright anger. “Oh, yes, I’m sure you’re sick! But you will go to school tomorrow!”
 
That night, wracked again with cold, unable to stop my trembling, I sought my parents’ bed, stood moaning till Mom woke and let me under the covers, where she tried to warm me with her body. Weeks later we learned that one of my classmates, a robust girl who shot baskets as well as any boy, had succumbed to the illness and died. That night, my mother placed her hand on my forehead–her smooth palm, her touch, gentle–and said to my barely awake dad, “Our daughter has a raging fever.” Like a miracle, I was still her child. Comforted, I slept.
~~~
At first you didn’t know me.
I was a shape moving rapidly, nervous 
at the edge of your vision. A flat, high voice,
dark slash of hair across my cheekbone. 
I made myself present, though never distinct.
Things I said that he repeated, a tone 
you could hear, but never trace, in his voice.
Silence—followed by talk of other things. 
When you would sit at your desk, I would creep
near you like a question. A thought would scurry 
across the front of your mind. I’d be there,
ducking out of sight. You must have felt me 
watching you, my small eyes fixed on your face,
the smile you wondered at, on the lips only. 
The voice on the phone, quick and full of business.
All that you saw and heard and could not find 
the center of, those days growing into years,
growing inside of you, out of reach, now with you 
forever, in your house, in your garden, in corridors
of dream where I finally tell you my name.
~~~
If faith is a tree that sorrow grows
and women, repentant or not, are swamps,
a man who comes for solace here   
will be up to his knees and slow
getting out. A name can turn on anyone.   
But say that a woman washes the dust
from a stranger’s feet
and sits quite dry-eyed in front
of her mirror at night.
The candle flame moves with her breath, as does
the hand of the painter, who sees in the flame   
his chance for virtuosity. She lets him leave
her shoulder bare.
Bedlam’s distilled from a Mary too,
St. Mary’s of Bethlehem, shelter   
for all the afflicted and weak
of mind. The donors conceived of as magi   
no doubt. The mad and the newborn
serve equally well for show.   
A whore with a heart, the rich
with a conscience, the keepers of language   
and hospitals badly embarrassed at times
by their charge. The mirror refuses
the candle, you see. And tears on another’s behalf
are not
the mirrors he’s pleased to regard.
Who loves his ironies buxom and grave   
must hate the foolish water of her eyes.
 
~~~
Does my little son miss the smell
of his first mother? I wonder
as the mewl of his mouth
opens toward a plastic bottle
that is not her breast.
 
Sudden new mother,
I bury my nose deep
into his skullcap of ringlets,
his starry cheesiness.
 
In her good-bye letter to him
sealed in his album
with a birth certificate, which now
list my name as Mother,
 
his first mother writes
she nursed him briefly
after he emerged into
the second room of his world.
 
I think of milk, volcanic
and insistent, answering
the newborn’s gigantic thirst,
a primal agreement between
generosity and greed.
 
Sometimes I press my nose
to the glass of that place
where a mother and my child
belong to each other;
I cannot imagine coming
between them.
 
But then I want to lick him all over
with a cow’s thick tongue,
to taste him and mark him as mine
so if the other mother returns,
she will refuse her handled calf
smeared with my smell.
 
~~~
It lies in our hands in crystals too intricate to decipher It goes into the skillet without being given a second thought It spills on the floor so fine we step all over it We carry a pinch behind each eyeball It breaks out on our foreheads We store it inside our bodies in secret wineskins At supper, we pass it around the table talking of holidays and the sea.
~~~
ILove, though for this you riddle me with darts,And drag me at your chariot till I die, —Oh, heavy prince! Oh, panderer of hearts! —Yet hear me tell how in their throats they lieWho shout you mighty: thick about my hair,Day in, day out, your ominous arrows purr,Who still am free, unto no querulous careA fool, and in no temple worshiper!I, that have bared me to your quiver's fire,Lifted my face into its puny rain,Do wreathe you Impotent to Evoke DesireAs you are Powerless to Elicit Pain!(Now will the god, for blasphemy so brave,Punish me, surely, with the shaft I crave!)III think I should have loved you presently,And given in earnest words I flung in jest;And lifted honest eyes for you to see,And caught your hand against my cheek and breast;And all my pretty follies flung asideThat won you to me, and beneath your gaze,Naked of reticence and shorn of pride,Spread like a chart my little wicked ways.I, that had been to you, had you remained,But one more waking from a recurrent dream,Cherish no less the certain stakes I gained,And walk your memory's halls, austere, supreme,A ghost in marble of a girl you knewWho would have loved you in a day or two.IIIOh, think not I am faithful to a vow!Faithless am I save to love's self alone.Were you not lovely I would leave you now:After the feet of beauty fly my own.Were you not still my hunger's rarest food,And water ever to my wildest thirst,I would desert you — think not but I would! —And seek another as I sought you first.But you are mobile as the veering air,And all your charms more changeful than the tide,Wherefore to be inconstant is no care:I have but to continue at your side.So wanton, light and false, my love, are you,I am most faithless when I most am true.IVI shall forget you presently, my dear,So make the most of this, your little day,Your little month, your little half a year,Ere I forget, or die, or move away,And we are done forever; by and byI shall forget you, as I said, but now,If you entreat me with your loveliest lieI will protest you with my favorite vow.I would indeed that love were longer-lived,And vows were not so brittle as they are,But so it is, and nature has contrivedTo struggle on without a break thus far, —Whether or not we find what we are seekingIs idle, biologically speaking.
~~~
Parc Georges-Brassens, Paris



Most afternoons, I’d run laps through Parc Brassens   where grows the second smallest vineyard   I have ever seen, and where those silver,   pruned-back stalks looked blunt,   strung-out on wires, and mostly dead   all winter. That was how I saw them.   That’s all I expected. Even in the cold,   I’d see a guy my age there, once a week,   playing his guitar. He’d sit next to the bench   where I’d be stretching. He rarely spoke—   just to ask if I’d like a song—   until the week before I left for good.   I was sitting at the top of a hill   about a hundred feet away from where   if you stand tiptoe you can see the Eiffel Tower.   He sat too close to me. We spoke of many things.   Then he suggested we go at it right there,   on the ground, under the sun. This is how   one lives who knows that she will die:   rolling in the arms of anyone when she can—   rolling in the arms of a musician—aware   that no one cares much what we do in little knolls behind reedy forsythia,   in the middle of a Tuesday, in the middle   of living. And I would know now   how he felt, and the ground against me,   and whether he was rough or sweet.   And what is possible would widen every hour.   Oh, but me, I thought I was immortal.
~~~
Coming together   
it is easier to work   
after our bodies   
meet
paper and pen
neither care nor profit
whether we write or not
but as your body moves
under my hands   
charged and waiting   
we cut the leash
you create me against your thighs   
hilly with images
moving through our word countries   
my body
writes into your flesh
the poem
you make of me.
Touching you I catch midnight   
as moon fires set in my throat   
I love you flesh into blossom   
I made you
and take you made
into me.
~~~
Can these movements which move themselves
be the substance of my attraction?
Where does this thin green silk come from that covers my body?
Surely any woman wearing such fabrics
would move her body just to feel them touching every part of her.
Yet most of the women frown, or look away, or laugh stiffly.
They are afraid of these materials and these movements
in some way.
The psychologists would say they are afraid of themselves, somehow.
Perhaps awakening too much desire—
that their men could never satisfy?
So they keep themselves laced and buttoned and made up
in hopes that the framework will keep them stiff enough not to feel
the whole register.
In hopes that they will not have to experience that unquenchable
desire for rhythm and contact.
If a snake glided across this floor
most of them would faint or shrink away.
Yet that movement could be their own.
That smooth movement frightens them—
awakening ancestors and relatives to the tips of the arms and toes.
So my bare feet
and my thin green silks
my bells and finger cymbals
offend them—frighten their old-young bodies.
While the men simper and leer—
glad for the vicarious experience and exercise.
They do not realize how I scorn them;
or how I dance for their frightened,
unawakened, sweet
women.
~~~
And now I have another lad!
    No longer need you tell
How all my nights are slow and sad
    For loving you too well.
His ways are not your wicked ways,
    He's not the like of you.
He treads his path of reckoned days,
    A sober man, and true.
They'll never see him in the town,
    Another on his knee.
He'd cut his laden orchards down,
   If that would pleasure me.
He'd give his blood to paint my lips
    If I should wish them red.
He prays to touch my finger-tips
   Or stroke my prideful head.
He never weaves a glinting lie,
    Or brags the hearts he'll keep.
I have forgotten how to sigh—
    Remembered how to sleep.
He's none to kiss away my mind—
    A slower way is his.
Oh, Lord! On reading this, I find
    A silly lot he is.
 
~~~
Yellow pines    No ever    no green    except
where stems brown needles green    I walk
on the wooden train    The fall’s water you swam in
one cold morning    What you braved    That ice
path    A horse fence    Where fences are horses
with long hair    I braid the tale of the fall of stables
Four paws touch dirt    stirring
a flirt of sky a bundle of rare    You bundle
into stables    I open with sandy tongue
taste the grain of barkwater
I look at myself in
a mirror of weather
Rain trenzas    Dirt cups us    We drink
& spin like tornillos    A swallow’s nest    like an adobe
tornado    Shit & mud & feathers & forming pitchfork claws
Eggshells gone    We rest in the ocean smalls
the pink throat
The back door is also the front    The only
smoke hole    Feathers rise
& we follow
~~~
For Max Rojas



Once a month when the moon loses everything, Don Max takes a chair to the edge of the sea. Black sand beach & green-backed heron. The moon  casts off her milkglass earrings. I am nothing, she says, but black & white. I keep losing my face. Don Max feels for his pipe in his pocket. Takes it, knocks it against his palm. I am old! She cries. I get gooseflesh in the dark. Don Max is looking for his tobacco. Don Max has found a match. You don’t know how hard it is to come back from nothing.  Don Max smiles & lights up.  I keep making the same mistakes, she says. I think you should leave me, she says.  Through smoke, she watches Don Max fold a strip of seaweed into a grasshopper. Leave me for your own good! She demands. Don Max has set the grasshopper in the sand. Besides, I am too beautiful.  She speaks it as though it makes her sad. I’ll find other lovers. I will forget you.
~~~
Ah, gaze not on those eyes! forbear
  That soft enchanting voice to hear:Not looks of basilisks give surer death,Nor Syrens sing with more destructive breath.
  Fly, if thy freedom thou’dst maintain,
  Alas! I feel th’advice is vain!A heart, whose safety but in flight does lie,Is too far lost to have the power to fly.
~~~
We could hear her
knocking down strands of cobweb
from ceilings—sticky filaments,
sacs of eggs—as we woke most mornings
to a worm of discontent.
It lodged beneath the heart,
rubbed our frayed nerves,
gnawed at the gut, spleen,
ovaries. Filth
 
was Mom's first enemy, so each day
began with ritual cleaning: the stab
and sweep of the broom down the dark hall,
over the stained and scratched oak floors.
 
For weeks, she held her dust mop
one-handed, and with the other
cupped a hernia, while she swore
at us kids in that hard voice—a litany of our sins
and failures: sloth,
stupidity, secrecy.
 
We watched her
smash the spiders that ran, herky-jerky,
along the baseboards, while we ran, too.
 
Glaring at each other,
we gathered up the scattered
laundry, our father’s shoes,
his newspapers and tools, our books,
drawings, music, sweatshirts,
and jackets, whatever
we’d left lying around.
 
We were guilty, but good
at evasion. We cultivated
shrewish or obsessive behaviors of our own: my tough
older sister sneered and stalked out of the house
to meet her boyfriend;
my sweet younger sister
trembled and cried, comforted
by one of our many dogs.
I slammed doors, pounded them
with my fists, screamed, “Shut up,
shut up, shut up!” She couldn’t
 
leave us alone. She loved us
too much.
 
Though we were quick, she was
quicker. Her words stung.
 
We must have deserved it.
~~~
                                                 (for Daniel, because                                                  
                                                 the Catacombs) 



You’re leaving Las Vegas, except
In German. Point. Point. Point.
Gave it out, beautiful gentilhommeComme vous êtes, toujours,
Unforgettable, circa 2008 how
You made me cum like that -
She got so mad in the bed - the
Hotel bathroom floor,
The bathtub, the apartment where
I was the crying queen
 
Those o’s still unforgettable
And now Paris. I cried today OW!
Your Antarctica cold last
Night. You told me they fucked
You up / I told you he broke
My heart and OW! Freeze
Dried my bandaid right off.
And then the glasses shopping
Memories today yada yada
Wasn’t about the cum shot
Where or if, was about the
Islands and how you said
in the langue d’enemie
No less: “DON’T TOUCH”
 
Don’t Touch!? We just …
They fucked you up all right.
You give so clearly but have iced
Out all the incoming gifts. WELL
PING my darling Walden island.
I can’t take that kind of cold.I’m leaving Las Vegas.
Just a moon in Taurus trying
To sing the sweet and
It’s not a great user experience
 
But I just want you to know
How unforgettable you are
 
 
When the candles call to Hera
I hope they melt your
I hope a goddess or many
Wash that loneliness away
And when I see you again (in 15 years)
There’s only joy and more
 
I prefer you laughing to tears
The good way. Drink us when
We’re done. Well, I guess I did
Almost kill you with a
Razor shave once so it
Seems silly to say I’m sorry I
Lost the phantom thread.
Maybe everything’s a ridiculous
never-ending non-planet
Tho, u did kiss me like unicorns
Exist and bond our skin
Like the organ it deserves to be
Known as
 
 
To know how unforgettable
you are because there
lies the bridge to the
Mainland. & baby, you
Deserve it all.
 
~~~
—Independence Day Celebration 2011, Dhaka




            i.
In a courtyard, in these stacks of chairs
            before the empty stage—near arewe Lord, near and graspable. Lord,
            accept these humble offerings:
stacks of biscuits wrapped in cellophane,
            stacks of bone in glass: thighbone,
spine. Stacks of white saucers, porcelain
            circles into which stacks of lip-worn
cups slide neat. Jawbone, Lord. Galleries
            of laminated clippings declaring war.
Hands unstack chairs into rows. The dead:
            they still go begging. 
~~~
I want to spend a lot but not all of my years with you.
We’ll talk about kids
                              but make plans to travel.
I will remember your eyes
                              as green when they were gray.
Our dogs will be named For Now and Mostly.
               Sex will be good but next door’s will sound better.
There will be small things.
I will pick up your damp towel from the bed,
                                                            and then I won’t.
I won’t be as hot as I was
                              when I wasn’t yours
and your hairline now so
               untrustworthy.
When we pull up alongside a cattle car
                              and hear the frightened lows,
                              I will silently judge you
                              for not immediately renouncing meat.
You will bring me wine
                              and notice how much I drink.
                                              The garden you plant and I plant
                              is tunneled through by voles,
                                                             the vowels
                                                             we speak aren’t vows,
               but there’s something
                              holding me here, for now,
               like your eyes, which I suppose
                                                             are brown, after all.
~~~
After Richard Siken



comes wave after wave after wave the derivative & harvest, the myrtle tops of sandstorms & milk glasses, apple, horse & song, list, listen, light leaks from the spaces between the bubbles — call it foam — tender pocket of yes yes yes call it flesh — eat tonight & you’ll still have to eat tomorrow, eat tonight & it still won’t be over — eat tonight: peaches bloom even in the dark, as wet as a girl — hands & feet, horse & song, the same hole bandaged over & over, not a wound but its absence — a sum of histories — the nights colliding like marbles, & if there is an end then it’s too dark to see, if there is an end then it’s too bright to see, hands folding, unfolding, & you, Scheherazade!, milky goddess of recursion, best DJ in the city, you spin records, spin heads, cross legs & cross deserts, & always pause just moments before he
~~~
when it pushes shadow from the trees
and presses it from their needles outside the Dye House
and the bus is dark inside     when it picks apart the lawn
and you are here
will you soften me?      for the sun
will you deflect it?
I am blinking in the atrium    the library
I don’t know if you have a room for me
or where on me you can lie down
 
but I want my anger easily exhausted
the way fact takes the rug from an argument
we both go on the floor
I do feel your shade
your wavy boughs   you dream
you are leaving me
I would become an ordinary person if you did
but you are awake   and I am ordinary anyway
and it pushes through me
 
  
~~~
A recipe for lamb tagine   demands a mysterious   ingredient: raz el hanout.   Animal, vegetable, compound   of kings like myrrh? I decide   not to look it up, to wait and   see. At first it is everything   we seek but can’t express.   Then it reverses: everything   thrust upon us—think fast!—   by the universe, like the leg   my friend Tom caught when   a cyclist got clipped by a car,   the driver stinking drunk   at 9:00 AM. Severed above   the knee, the leg flung itself   into the air, a javelin. Tom,   always quick, reached up and   caught it. But the story has   a twist. After the cyclist died   in an ambulance, the widow   inexplicably came on to Tom.   Not that Tom is unattractive.   Indeed he is the sort of man   I’d throw myself at if I were   a leg. It’s hard to imagine   the sex that Tom and this   woman would have had there in the hotel room   with the blackout curtains   pulled. I’ve never had sex   with Tom myself, but if I had   been that leg or that woman   I might have whispered,   “What fine reflexes you   have, Sir!” “Sir, say something   tender!” “Cradle me against   the guttural gasp from your   solar plexus.” “Oh, Sir, I   sense the tip of bone   on skin, a surge of déjà vu.”   “I am coming, I am about   to come, your shuddering   lover, your raz el hanout.”
~~~
It will be windy for a while until it isn’t. The waves will shoal. A red-legged
cormorant will trace her double along glassy water, forgetting they are hungry.
The sea will play this motif over and over, but there will be no preparing for it
otherwise. Water will quiver in driftwood. Sound preceding absence,
a white dog trailing a smaller one: ghost and noon shadow, two motes
disappearing into surf. And when the low tide comes lapping and clear, the curled
fronds of seaweed will furl and splay, their algal sisters brushing strands
against sands where littleneck clams feed underwater. Light rain will fall
and one cannot help but lean into the uncertainty of the sea. Bow: a knot
of two loops, two loose ends, our bodies on either side of this shore where we
will dip our hands to feel what can’t be seen. Horseshoe crabs whose blue
blood rich in copper will reach for cover, hinged between clouds and
sea. It will never be enough, the bull kelp like a whip coiling in tender hands,
hands who know to take or be taken, but take nothing with them: I will marry you.
I will marry you. So we can owe what we own to every beautiful thing.
 
~~~
My monkey-wrench man is my sweet patootie;
the lover of my life, my youth and age.
My heart belongs to him and to him only;
the children of my flesh are his and bear his rage
Now grown to years advancing through the dozens
the honeyed kiss, the lips of wine and fire
fade blissfully into the distant years of yonder
but all my days of Happiness and wonder
are cradled in his arms and eyes entire.
They carry us under the waters of the world
out past the starposts of a distant planet
And creeping through the seaweed of the ocean
they tangle us with ropes and yarn of memories
where we have been together, you and I.
~~~
for Jackson Allen



My friend wears my scarf at his waist
I give him moonstones
He gives me shell & seaweeds
He comes from a distant city & I meet him
We will plant eggplants & celery together
He weaves me cloth
                   Many have brought the gifts
                   I use for his pleasure
                   silk, & green hills
                   & heron the color of dawn
My friend walks soft as a weaving on the wind
He backlights my dreams
He has built altars beside my bed
I awake in the smell of his hair & cannot remember
his name, or my own.
~~~
It’s September: I’ve moved into town,
into the attic of an old barn—a big open room I reach
by climbing a ladder that rises through a hole in the floor.
The room is long and high, with windows at each end,
a row of skylights that leak rain, and shake
and chatter in the northeast winds. I sleep beneath
the roof’s steep pitch, my mattress flat on the boards,
looking up at the high ceiling, where morning
diffuses downward in grains of bright dust. 
This was the old painter’s studio.
The light in those famous canvases is still here
—he couldn’t carry it away with him—
though his paintings took away everything else,
opening space with a stroke of blue or yellow.
I think of his violent loves, the stories
they still tell about him here.
But how quiet and alive his paintings were,
how they quiver with the life not yet realized. 
The town is quiet in September.
Sometimes I hear people talking in the street.
Last night someone said they were going to wait for Michael,
and a voice said that Michael had gone home.
I walk the narrow path down to the marsh.
Wind hard in the dunes. Rain as I’m returning,
cutting through twisting streets, past gardens bent
low with rain, their colors a wash of gold. 
I feel the air surround my body, feel it move
between my legs and between each finger,
as I walk, not mastering space, but in it.
And when the clouds open, the sky
suddenly wide and high, no roof of leaves,
it seems there’s nowhere to go but into wind or water.
I climb the narrow stairs that keep turning,
twisting inward until they meet the ceiling,
which opens and I rise through the floor,
released into an openness I never learn to expect. 
At the yellow table I sit and read
an interview with Picasso’s lover, Francoise Gilot,
the only one to leave him and have another life.
She says she was not destroyed by him, as the others were:
“Because I am of the stuff that cannot be destroyed.”
I felt something blow through me then.
Some devouring wind. Surely, then,
I am of the stuff that can be destroyed.
Haven’t I felt it? The breaking of all I was?
Don’t I sit and count my losses,
here in this room where all the life I knew has ended,
so bare with desire I seem to be eating sky? 
That’s how it is here: I’m lonely, sad;
the wind blows along the roof and I can’t sleep.
Rain runs down the walls and streams across the floor,
leaving dirty puddles on the boards.
A yellow table and a cupboard painted blue,
three chairs that don't match, or even balance rightly,
a dented bucket, its metal reflecting darkly
what is, what cannot be taken away.
What’s beautiful here? The whole thing
is beauty, a clarity not in things
but around them, complete. And still, 
I seem to remain, somehow, myself,
to remain at least something, at a loss
to know how much can be taken from me
and leave me only changed, not ruined,
alert in an emptiness so alive
I recognized it as my life. What would be left,
the shape of it then, this life? I said some beauty,
or radiance, an endless space I fall into
or am taken up by, a brightness that holds me,
gathers light in the center of empty space,
like a vision of the life I have not lived.
~~~
We spend our morning
in the flower stalls counting
the dark tongues of bells
that hang from ropes waiting   
for the silence of an hour.
We find a table, ask for paella,
cold soup and wine, where a calm   
light trembles years behind us.
In Buenos Aires only three
years ago, it was the last time his hand   
slipped into her dress, with pearls   
cooling her throat and bells like
these, chipping at the night—
As she talks, the hollow
clopping of a horse, the sound   
of bones touched together.
The paella comes, a bed of rice   
and camarones, fingers and shells,   
the lips of those whose lips
have been removed, mussels
the soft blue of a leg socket.
This is not paella, this is what
has become of those who remained   
in Buenos Aires. This is the ring   
of a rifle report on the stones,   
her hand over her mouth,
her husband falling against her.
These are the flowers we bought   
this morning, the dahlias tossed
on his grave and bells
waiting with their tongues cut out   
for this particular silence.
~~~
“Being so caught up
  So mastered.”
                                       —Yeats



I was too shy to say anything but Your poems are so beautiful.
What kinds of things, feelings, or ideas inspire you,
I mean, outside the raw experiences of your life?
He turned a strange crosshatched color
as if he stood in a clouded painting, and said, Thanks,
but no other phenomena intrude upon my starlit mind.
 
I see you are wondering what this is all about. Don’t mind
me, I’m talking to myself again. Yes, poetry is nice and often beautiful,
yet it doesn’t beget much attention, money, or even a simple thanks
for placing the best words in the best order. That’s when I forget all about your
incessant demands, and the restless subject leaps the stream in Technicolor—
until the Remembrancer appears and says, Stop this wasteful life.
 Doctor, lawyer, thief. These fancies of yours could cost a life
or worse, two. Meanwhile, he perceives my gifted body upholding my mind
as I’m explaining my stuff on the Unicorn Tapestries, cheeks starting to color,
feathers ruffling, quiet shudders. He shrugs, Your content sounds too beautiful
but I’d like to read it sometime. Okay. He says all the right things, like I love you
Hyacinth Girl. Things get interesting until the sudden blow: Thanks
 
For the memories. What I’ll think seeing his new work in The New Yorker is Thanks
for nothing, asshole, as he drops me for that prolific pastoral life
with his wife upstate. The more I think about it, it all depends upon your
phantom attention. Surely a world embroiders itself in one’s mind
at any moment, words resounding, ardent present clarifyingly beautiful
And beautifully truthful. You know? Here I should put in a lapis color
 
Or a murky midnight blue. Or have the crowd stagger by in a riot of color
pinning down the helpless beast with spears and ritualistic thanks
to their gods. What one really wants to get at is the real, the eternally beautiful
like The White Album or something. That’s what makes one perilous life
worth living. All the brute indifference, humiliation, and failure can put one in the   
             mind
to give up, freak out, kill somebody, heart battered, so mastered. Oh you
 
Wherever I go, on the subway, in my cubicle, at play, in sleep, it’s always you
of the air, overpowering my senses like a Dutch master in one pure color,
its fiction at full speed, walls breaking, a clarity panorama for the mind
hunting for meaning and finding it at last! Now look at all the work I did, and not
            one thanks
Not even flowers. Off you rush to watch him accept another award in that life
We can only dream of. From where you sit it all seems so beautiful
 
And I finally understand you. For that I can’t express enough thanks
As the subject is the best color for me in the difficulty of this lonely life.
It’s always caught up in my mind, what could be more beautiful.
~~~
The last string quartet

(Leoš Janáček and Kamila Stösslová)



She reads romances, she spells poorly, she’s full-breasted,   
broad in the beam, matron in a cloche hat,
bulky knee-length skirt, apron, thick calves, white stockings, Mary Janes.
Her heels go click click on the pavement.
She has those dark Gypsy eyes and the wide laugh.
He loves it when she tosses her head like that.
And here she is in long skirt and embroidered blouse, posing   
by her dwarf ornamental orange tree on the balcony:
high pale forehead, stacked dark hair, heavy jaw, bust cleaving forward like a prow.   
And here she is on holiday with her husband the businessman the perpetual traveller   
with the commanding walk and striped tie and blunt mustache.
“Two decidedly Jewish types,” writes Zdenka Janáčková, J’s wife:
they send her, in the last year of the war,   
bread, butter, eggs, semolina flour, geese   
from the husband’s military contacts.
*
“My dear dark dove,” J calls Kamila, “My little one.”   
*
He has taken dictation from every fountain in Hukvaldy,   
where he was born to endless mumbled rosaries of water.   
He notes the gush and prattle of the Fox’s Well
as the beech tree flashes its sleight of leaf, and fox kits hide in the rocks;   
the public fountain, “a fine of ten crowns
on those who fail to replace the cover”:
and when the cover is replaced
the fountain closes her eyes;
the castle fountain, handsome, broad and brimming, but scuttled into pipes
for manor farm, brewery and slaughterhouse
where the stream blurts out in blood;
and the little well hidden through tall grass at Kazničov,   
springing up through the roots of three lime trees, “Helisov’s Well,”
chants the little girl, and he notes that too, the quavering fall   
of the name; and watches water bugs skitter
and green moss, darkling, at the bottom, and shards of sky.   
*
Bread, butter, eggs, semolina flour, geese.
Kamila knows nothing of music, she worries about her dress   
for the première of Jenůfa in Vienna.
She has two little boys, Rudi and Otto.
Otto the baby swims on her hand
and she leans over him, soft as night, one eyebrow tilted up   
as at a dream of which she is hardly aware.   
*
“She was of medium height, dark, curly-haired like a Gypsy woman,”   
writes Zdenka, “with great, black bulging eyes.
The voice was unpleasant, shrill.”   
*
—That once again he saw “her raven hair, all loose,”
and she was barefoot in the house
and she climbed a ladder to pick apricots from the tree   
and she refused the gift of the knitted silver bag
“And your eye has a strange depth, it’s so deep it doesn’t shine.”   
*
Night leans hugely.
He sleeps alone, in his study, upstairs at the Organ School.   
Zdenka sleeps in their villa across the yard.   
*
He who had scrawled
on his cuffs, on envelope scraps, on market paper, in his little pad,   
robins’ trills, girls’ chatter at the railway station,
fox bark, thrush whistle, hen cackle,
kitten mew, bee hum, “the chord of stalagmites covered with hoarfrost,”   
the airy, bell-like patter of fountain spray,
    scored
    in a notebook
    years before Kamila
    in a notebook
    2 A.M. 24 February 1903
    his daughter’s dying   
    words—
    Olga—
    dying, age 21—
    in a notebook—
    “Now I remember that I’m supposed to die”
    (a little string of quarter notes, B and middle C)—
    “What walks we took on the corso”—“We
    should say so much—”
    He tells her,
    “You are the most beautiful among them,” and she smiles,   
    in his notebook she smiles.
    And, down to a G,
    “Something gets lost so well, no one can find it.”
    In a notebook—
    2:45 A.M. 25 February 1903, Olga,
    her light hair spread across the pillow,
    sighs
    “A-y-a,” two drawn out B’s, scrupulously noted by her father,   
    and in the margin,
    “God be with you, my soul.”   
*
What can be assimilated into song?   
*
The rivers of Lachia: the River Lubina
falls from a ridge of the Radhošť Mountain
into an abyss, to seethe of silver, crash of dark;
the Ondřejnice dabbles through the village of Mĕrkovice,
past mossy banks, shallow, beery-blonde, tepid, where goslings swim
dunking for weeds and bugs; and the River Ostravice   
is the color of steel, and smites the wrist with cold:
and all the Lachian rivers run
through cello depths, horn hurtle, foam-spray of glockenspiel,   
clash of cymbals at the smoky inn
where Sofie Harabisová flies from arm to arm
in the glare, smoke, sweat and stamp of feet:
“Where is the poet Šťastný or Professor Batĕk or Mrs. Marie Jungova now?
Gone, all gone, those who took part
that wild summer night, forty-five years ago!”   
*
Kamila reads romances.
“There’s no love just innocent   
friendship. My husband’s   
away all the time he’s always   
got things to do.”   
*
“Your raven hair—
I write these lines so they’ll be read, and yet unread   
because unanswered.
So it’s like a stone falling into water—”
“You’re the star I look for in evening—”   
“I was your shadow—”   
“Even thoughts become flesh—”
in the fountain bubbling up among the lime tree roots,   
mumbling its prayers over and over, tonguing the stones.   
*
Now after the war, no need
for bread, butter, eggs, semolina flour, geese delivered   
by special connection
and Czechoslovakia is free in the Sinfonietta, in the razzle of brass:
“I’m really
an ordinary woman Your heart would stop   
aching if you saw me more.”
There’s Rudi, there’s Otto,
and her husband always dealing in his antiques.
No we cannot attend the première in Prague no we cannot.   
Now after the war.
For that cold: boil three onions with marjoram and lemon peel   
and drink it like tea with sugar.
Your raven hair.
I was your shadow, when you reached for the apricots.   
*
Gut scrapings: the bow scrapes sunlight from that summer day at the spa at Luhačovice   
where she sat on the grass “like an exhausted little bird”:
“Dear Madam, Accept these few roses as a token”
where she sat on the grass, scrape sunlight   
from the inner petals, scrape the dark from   
her pupil, so deep it doesn’t shine.
Madam:
“Silence goes to sleep under every tree.”   
Under the tilt of her shadowed brow.   
His baby son died those years ago
                                                      and Olga’s hair   
spreads wide across the pillow where she sighs.
He sleeps alone   
it’s like a stone   
falling.   
*
Lullaby,
bee swarms,
gut scraping, fracture, a waltz
falters, the schmaltzy tune with raven hair   
whispers, breaks off, and the hand she lets him   
touch, for the first time, she does not draw away   
the first time, “your little hand,”
in eleven years, under the linden boughs.
“That dark Jewess,” writes Zdenka, “I rather   
liked her at first, but I held my position.   
You know how artists are. They have to be   
handled. I would not                                    
                                                                let him go.”   
*
“These letters were written in fire.”
Zdenka must   
                understand:
                                    Kamila is
the Gypsy girl, Káťa Kabanová, the Vixen, Aljeja,
the little hidden well by the lime trees at Kazničov,   
the military fanfare on the promenade,
trumpet, oboe, piccolo squeal
when the Austrians march out, the Empire crashes, and the country is,   
like the high-wire flute notes, finally, free.
Zdenka must acknowledge this:   
          These letters
                     were written in fire.   
*
By now Kamila’s boys have been stuffed into trousers, stiff collars, and neckties.   
They’ve grown leggy, their faces are plump.
It’s a question of tempi slightly retarded, a vertigo   
the viola suffers, following the violins.
Silence goes to sleep under every tree.
The cello drags
gusts of confetti, repetition, emotion is all
repetition
pulled by twisted horsehair   
out of gut.
My dear dark dove, a form of mourning,
that too is a form   
of repetition.
Why don’t you write.
So when, those last days, she has come   
at last, with little Otto, respectably
to visit the upstairs room he has built and furnished for her
in his summer cottage in Hukvaldy,
furnished according to his dream—
“I want to have the painting of those two cherubs, a writing desk, a communal table,
a comfortable bed, perhaps of brass, a wardrobe with mirrored doors, a marble wash-stand,
and four chairs, each from a different part of the world—”   
   (the question is, what can be assimilated   
   into song)
she peels oranges, makes tea,
they shop in the market and play and walk
and August 8, on the walk up the Babí hůra Hill, Otto gets lost in the woods and ravines—
Something gets lost so well, no one can find it—
and Leoš seeks and seeks the child in drenching rain   
as if searching for his own
son
in the woods and ravines
under the wing of her darkly tilting brow
and returns   
fevered.
In a notebook no one writes, no one scores his cough.   
10 August 1928 J consents to go   
to the hospital in Ostrava
pneumonia—deterioration—sedative
      What walks we took on the corso   
             Something gets lost so well   
      So it’s like a stone
      Silence goes to sleep under every tree   
             I was your shadow   
      I burned your letters but I keep                  
                                                                        the ash
No one scored the sleep rattle in Ostrava
12 August 10 A.M. Sunday Kamila at his side,
a heavy woman who spells poorly, broad in the beam,   
with thick knees and white stockings,
who reads romances,
who will die of cancer
seven years later
at 43
and be buried in the Jewish cemetery in Písek.
       “And I kissed you
       And you are sitting beside me and I am happy and at peace   
       In such a way do the days pass for the angels.”
No one scored the sleep rattle Sunday 12 August.   
Only then, by his order,
Zdenka   
is told
and arrives by train.
                                    These letters were written in fire.
~~~
It's often those           who talk a streak on world affairs           and love and peace who seem to love           and peace the least.
~~~
    
     Three summers since I chose a maid,
     Too young maybe—but more’s to do
     At harvest-time than bide and woo.
              When us was wed she turned afraid
     Of love and me and all things human;
     Like the shut of a winter’s day
     Her smile went out, and ’twadn’t a woman—
            More like a little frightened fay.
                    One night, in the Fall, she runned away.
 
     “Out ’mong the sheep, her be,” they said,
     ’Should properly have been abed;
     But sure enough she wadn’t there
     Lying awake with her wide brown stare.
So over seven-acre field and up-along across the down
     We chased her, flying like a hare
     Before out lanterns. To Church-Town
              All in a shiver and a scare
     We caught her, fetched her home at last
              And turned the key upon her, fast.
 
     She does the work about the house
     As well as most, but like a mouse:
              Happy enough to chat and play
              With birds and rabbits and such as they,
              So long as men-folk keep away.
     “Not near, not near!” her eyes beseech
     When one of us comes within reach.
              The women say that beasts in stall
              Look round like children at her call.
              I’ve hardly heard her speak at all.
 
     Shy as a leveret, swift as he,
     Straight and slight as a young larch tree,
     Sweet as the first wild violets, she,
     To her wild self. But what to me?
 
     The short days shorten and the oaks are brown,
              The blue smoke rises to the low grey sky,
     One leaf in the still air falls slowly down,
              A magpie’s spotted feathers lie
     On the black earth spread white with rime,
     The berries redden up to Christmas-time.
              What’s Christmas-time without there be
              Some other in the house than we!
 
              She sleeps up in the attic there
              Alone, poor maid. ’Tis but a stair
     Betwixt us. Oh! my God! the down,
     The soft young down of her, the brown,
The brown of her—her eyes, her hair, her hair!
~~~
Then came the darker sooner,

came the later lower.

We were no longer a sweeter-here

happily-ever-after. We were after ever.

We were farther and further.

More was the word we used for harder.

Lost was our standard-bearer.

Our gods were fallen faster,

and fallen larger.

The day was duller, duller

was disaster. Our charge was error.

Instead of leader we had louder,

instead of lover, never. And over this river

broke the winter’s black weather.
~~~
Love faded in my heart—I thought it was dead.Now new flowers start,Fresh leaves outspread.Why do these flowers upstartAnd again the leaves spread?Oh, when will it be dead—This root that tears my heart!
~~~
Despite all their fervor     they were headed somewhere   limp   in the intellect     nursery rhyme dialect headed   somewhere   all   circumference     hunnid   something for Sumerian   tablet happy meals   where you get     to munch   the   code-cold   sun upfront     the rest   when you’ve     eaten a bit of rat flesh   in the shape of yesterday     perishing
                              youth addiction : Future dreams of codeine nibbles the white nipple wedged between him and his     soul   stice staaay sis what is this?     passes out     on the battlefield, improviser  /    wisest man I ever   mumbled   alongside     Power   with all the wars   in it ain’t shit     in   a   flawed   system     besides   self-destruction   may all our enemies   become powerful   and empty   in the west   while we sell our bodies   these   mumbled   prayers codeine   ain’t got nothin to   do     with my   love, child   either
labor in the holds was painless
bled ’til the chains lost their grip
and there are   tapes   to prove it
~~~
These lovers’ inklings which our loves enmesh,   
Lost to the cunning and dimensional eye,   
Though tenemented in the selves we see,   
Not more perforce than azure to the sky,   
Were necromancy-juggled to the flesh,   
And startled from no daylight you or me.
For trance and silvemess those moons commend,   
Which blanch the warm life silver-pale; or look   
What ghostly portent mist distorts from slight   
Clay shapes; the willows that the waters took   
Liquid and brightened in the waters bend,   
And we, in love’s reflex, seemed loved of right.
Then no more think to net forthwith love’s thing,   
But cast for it by spirit sleight-of-hand;
Then only in the slant glass contemplate,   
Where lineament outstripping line is scanned,   
Then on the perplexed text leave pondering,   
Love’s proverb is set down transliterate.
~~~
When you, that at this moment are to me
Dearer than words on paper, shall depart,
And be no more the warder of my heart,
Whereof again myself shall hold the key;
And be no more—what now you seem to be—
The sun, from which all excellences start
In a round nimbus, nor a broken dart
Of moonlight, even, splintered on the sea;
I shall remember only of this hour—
And weep somewhat, as now you see me weep—
The pathos of your love, that, like a flower,
Fearful of death yet amorous of sleep,
Droops for a moment and beholds, dismayed,
The wind whereon its petals shall be laid.
 
~~~
An hour inland from Bangor, Maine,
over rolling hills, in an oval pasture
surrounded by giant conifers,
the forest floor bejeweled
with ruby-studded mushrooms,
I watch the sheep sing,
if bleating could be called a song.
Maybe someone in a grove long ago
saw a man attached to a beast
of burden and so the concept
of the satyr was born. Memory is
the past reversed. I once
went out with a sailor, a Spaniard,
from Andalucía. We met at sea
where I worked the roulette wheel
in the ship’s casino. His legs
were slightly bowed, his voice
gruff and torn, and when he came
the sound seemed to climb up
not from his throat but from his feet
smelling of earth and sea and grief—
a deep song Lorca called duende.
It wasn’t pretty. His blue and red
and purple briefs soaking in a bucket
by the cabin door. He told me once
when he was a boy his grandmother
had caught him trying to fuck
a chicken. The poor chicken,
he laughed, his saddle-worn Andalucían
laugh, feathers flying everywhere, his
grandmother screaming. And what
to call those half-human, half-chicken
kinds of days: scratching and clawing
at the earth, bathed in dust,
trying not to think about the simmering
anise, peppercorn, and broth.
When I visited him, he met me
at the airport. Then the long train 
ride south through field after field
of sunflowers. Por la tarde families
paraded, por la noche, only men
and boys and extranjeras—foreign women—
out past sunset. In an empty disco six
or seven guys danced, throwing themselves
around madly, slamming into each
other to Blondie’s “Heart of Glass.”
Franco had died a few years back.
From my window that night, a full moon,
shadows of the town square, the boarded-up
cathedral, a cat in heat, the smell
of blood oranges. In the morning
his grandmother, all in black,
asleep stooped in a chair outside
my door. Nearby the ruins of an ancient
Roman temple, goats on hind legs
eating the pale green leaves from olive trees.
~~~
How is your life with that other one?
Simpler, is it? A stroke of the oars
and a long coastline—
and the memory of me
is soon a drifting island
(not in the ocean—in the sky!)
Souls—you will be sisters—
sisters, not lovers.
How is your life with an ordinary
woman? without the god inside her?
The queen supplanted—
How do you breathe now?
Flinch, waking up?
What do you do, poor man?
“Hysterics and interruptions—
enough! I’ll rent my own house!”
How is your life with that other,
you, my own.
Is the breakfast delicious?
(If you get sick, don’t blame me!)
How is it, living with a postcard?
You who stood on Sinai.
How’s your life with a tourist
on Earth? Her rib (do you love her?)
is it to your liking?
How’s life? Do you cough?
Do you hum to drown out the mice in your mind?
How do you live with cheap goods: is the market rising?
How’s kissing plaster-dust?
Are you bored with her new body?
How’s it going, with an earthly woman,
with no sixth sense?
                                                         Are you happy?
No? In a shallow pit—how is your life,
my beloved? Hard as mine
with another man?1924
~~~
National Portrait Gallery



I have a need to see the painting when no one is looking. The god-
thought if there was such a thing, inconsolable, of Saturday
reaching for Sunday to ride out onto the Indian Ocean like
an argument of starched waves in their coffin-white lace I might
finger as I pass. There are hands in the paintings: raised, pointing,
folded, reaching, reaching    ...    there’s a leporello book intended for
my ex-lover’s breathing, weather balloons like colored severed heads
laughing their way up the sky’s fever-continuing threshold of three
miles withholding this formula for desire. Beside the one body and its
skying figures of speech, night’s impressionist-flecked mask captured
by singing: try to inhale. And again, please. Cough up cadmium twice,
suddenly. Carry the caraway seed page away, fill your sea purse head
with the tiny unborn. Painting, like digging up your garden in the dark,
isn’t spring. Isn’t daddy root, mama bud pullulating for some creation.
Isn’t spring. Isn’t season’s salt measure for your worth. Whoever
told you that lied about what’s to be framed next.
~~~
From Daddy sprung my inborn ribaldry.
His crudeness destined me to be the same.
A seedlet, flowered from a shitty heap,
I came, the crowning glory of his aim.
From Mother I inherited ennui,
The leg irons of the queendom I once rattled.
But I won’t let such chains imprison me.
And there is just no telling what this brat’ll...!
This marriage thing? We snub our nose at it.
What’s pearl turns piss, what’s classy breeds what’s smutty.
But like it? Lump it? Neither’s exigent.
And I’m the end result of all that fucking.
Do what you will! This world’s your oyster, Pet.
But be forewarned. The sea might drown you yet.
~~~
First time he kissed me, he but only kissed The fingers of this hand wherewith I write, And ever since it grew more clean and white,... Slow to world-greetings...quick with its “Oh, list,” When the angels speak. A ring of amethyst I could not wear here plainer to my sight, Than that first kiss. The second passed in height The first, and sought the forehead, and half missed, Half falling on the hair. O beyond meed! That was the chrism of love, which love’s own crown, With sanctifying sweetness, did precede. The third, upon my lips, was folded down In perfect, purple state! since when, indeed, I have been proud and said, “My Love, my own.”
~~~
Once again, someone falls in their first falling–fall of two bodies, of two eyes, of four green eyes or eight green eyes if we count those born in the mirror (at midnight, in the purest fear, in the loss), you haven’t been able to recognize the voice of your dull silence, to see the earthly messages scrawled in the middle of one mad state, when the body is a glass and from ourselves and from the other we drink some kind of impossible water.
         Desire needlessly spills on me a cursed liqueur. For my thirsty thirst, what can the promise of eyes do? I speak of something not in this world. I speak of someone whose purpose is elsewhere.
         And I was naked in memory of the white night. Drunk and I made love all night, just like a sick dog.
         Sometimes we suffer too much reality in the space of a single night. We get undressed, we’re horrified. We’re aware the mirror sounds like a watch, the mirror from which your cry will pour out, your laceration.
         Night opens itself only once. It’s enough. You see. You’ve seen. Fear of being two in the mirror, and suddenly we’re four. We cry, we moan, my fear, my joy more horrible than my fear, my visceral words, my words are keys that lock me into a mirror, with you, but ever alone. And I am well aware what night is made of. We’ve fallen so completely into jaws that didn’t expect this sacrifice, this condemnation of my eyes which have seen. I speak of a discovery: felt the I in sex, sex in the I. I speak of burying everyday fear to secure the fear of an instant. The purest loss. But who’ll say: you don’t cry anymore at night? Because madness is also a lie. Like night. Like death.
 
~~~
What can I tell you? It was a summer that seemed to be
making history — their personal history — almost before
it began, and they stood back slightly, still in it, but
observing it, saying “the summer this,” “the summer that,”
all the while it was going on. They became obsessed with
a fountain, for example, one they walked past each day,
how abundantly it would reach upwards and yet be pouring
back down itself the whole time — all winter this fountain
had been dry, not saying a word. What more can I tell you?
Oh, everything — like how they would walk home in
the evenings when the light was soft, anything bad sliding
off them, and they would feel owned, completely owned,
in a good way, by the air, which would touch them constantly,
sometimes urgently, sometimes lightly, just to let them know
it was there, and they would think maybe this is what being
alive is, when they saw how complicated a tree was and how
it wanted them looking at it and saying this, how the color
of a particular flower at this particular moment was redder
even than the life force, whatever that is, if you could open
it up and get right down inside it, if you could put your mouth
to it and become as red as that rose even, it was still redder
than that, and they wouldn’t know what to do with themselves
so they wouldn’t do anything except listen to the songs in their
heads which were sad ones like nearly all good songs and watch
this feeling rolling in, sunshine or rain, we don’t know yet,
it’s a good one, it’s the best one, though it has no name.
~~~
Sorrow like a ceaseless rain
   Beats upon my heart.People twist and scream in pain, —Dawn will find them still again;This has neither wax nor wane,
   Neither stop nor start.People dress and go to town;
   I sit in my chair.All my thoughts are slow and brown:Standing up or sitting downLittle matters, or what gown
   Or what shoes I wear.
~~~
Love peruse me, seeke, and findeHow each corner of my minde            Is a twine            Woven to shine.Not a Webb ill made, foule fram’d,Bastard not by Father nam’d,            Such in me            Cannot bee.Deare behold me, you shall seeFaith the Hive, and love the Bee,            Which doe bring.            Gaine and sting.Pray desect me, sinewes, vaines,Hold, and loves life in those gaines;            Lying bare            To despaire,When you thus anotamiseAll my body, my heart prise;            Being true            Just to you.Close the Truncke, embalme the Chest,Where your power still shall rest,            Joy entombe,            Loves just doome.
~~~
When last we parted, thou wert young and fair,
  How beautiful let fond remembrance say!
  Alas! since then old time has stolen awayFull thirty years, leaving my temples bare.—So has it perished like a thing of air,
  The dream of love and youth!— now both are grey
  Yet still remembering that delightful day,Though time with his cold touch has blanched my hair,
  Though I have suffered many years of painSince then, though I did never think to live
  To hear that voice or see those eyes again,I can a sad but cordial greeting give,And for thy welfare breathe as warm a prayer—As when I loved thee young and fair.
~~~
I
Every day it is the same.
He comes home.
He tells her about it.
As he speaks, his breath condenses in front of his face.
She goes about her business;
every now and then she looks over.
She doesn’t hear his voice.
She sees the soft fog that continues to form a halo.
She knows he is still talking about that place.
He never tires of it like she does.
Only on summer days when the air is hot
and moisture is still a long time in coming,
she asks him to tell her about that place.
She sits facing him.
Waiting for the first vocalic, non-stops,
the push of air from his lips.
He tells her of the place where clouds are formed.
The cool dampness of his voice is rich.
Even on a dry June day
her face beads with wetness
as he talks directly to her.
Each aspirated sound a gentle burst of coolness.
“Tell me again, tell me again,” she teases.
If he knew she only wanted relief from the heat
and not the story, he would stop talking.
He begins, “The first time I saw the place
where clouds are formed was from
the window of a train . . .”
Another time was in a mirage
in the heat outside Tucson.
Once he thought he saw it
in the dry light of stars.
The place he remembers best
was when he saw it in the eyes
of a woman he spoke to.
When he first noticed it,
she hid it by lowering her gaze.
Soon she let him look freely.
There were times when she opened her eyes
wide, allowing an unobscured view.
Sometimes he saw her eyes smolder
with dryness on a summer day.
Other times she was rich with moisture.
Clouds came in succession.
The earth’s shadows muted.
“You know the forty days
and forty nights?
I was there.
I’ll be there when it happens again,”
she said with a slight smile.
Like a child, he rushed to look
into her eyes at every opportunity.
If he could, he would hang on her eye socket,
peering inside,
marveling at her displays.
II
An unusually cold December day right around Christmas;
clouds, mist find solace in the canyons of the Santa Catalina Mountains.
White moisture quietly moving amid the cactus.
Truly, clouds, wind, and rain are the few elements
that can touch the saguaro from head to foot.
Oblivious of spines, needles.
Rubbery hide surrounded, soothed by elements.
Contact triggers stored heat of remembered summers.
Moisture beads roll forward, unstoppable.
From the city below
we see mist rising, mist rising.
III
We sit close in the cab of the truck.
The weather is cold, wet outside.
Too messy to stand in
waiting for a school bus.
My father’s truck is warm inside,
having been at work since four a.m.
The sound of the engine is soothing,
heater working to capacity.
Inside the cab we are silent.
We don’t need language.
We listen to the regular hum of the engine,
rhythm of the windshield wipers,
soft rain on the hood.
Aware of the cold air
surrounding our temporary shelter.
We look out over the fields
where fog clings to the soil.
Every now and then
with the back of his gloved hand
he wipes the windshield.
“Is it coming yet?”
The three of us sit quietly,
breathing clouds.
Clouds condense as
they contact the coolness of the windows.
My father appears to breathe air
with temperature in balance.
He forms no clouds.
He watches us.
We continue to breathe
gray, soft mist, waiting for the school bus.
~~~
My dearest dust, could not thy hasty dayAfford thy drowzy patience leave to stayOne hower longer: so that we might eitherSate up, or gone to bedd together?But since thy finisht labor hath possestThy weary limbs with early rest,Enjoy it sweetly: and thy widdowe brideShall soone repose her by thy slumbring side.Whose business, now, is only to prepareMy nightly dress, and call to prayre:Mine eyes wax heavy and ye day growes old.The dew falls thick, my beloved growes cold.Draw, draw ye closed curtaynes: and make room:My dear, my dearest dust; I come, I come. 
~~~
I used an arrow to kill the spider.   I used a steamroller to flatten the worm.   For the ants I called in an air strike.   Bee that found its way in through the screen:   blowtorch.   The mammals were easier—   a bucket of water for submerging the cat,   a poisoned word thrown to the dog.   For love, only a kitchen match. That   and a stove leaking gas   and waiting until the dinner   was good and burned.
~~~
She had forgotten how the August night
Was level as a lake beneath the moon,
In which she swam a little, losing sight
Of shore; and how the boy, who was at noon
Simple enough, not different from the rest,
Wore now a pleasant mystery as he went,
Which seemed to her an honest enough test
Whether she loved him, and she was content.
So loud, so loud the million crickets’ choir. . .
So sweet the night, so long-drawn-out and late. . .
And if the man were not her spirit’s mate,
Why was her body sluggish with desire?
Stark on the open field the moonlight fell,
But the oak tree’s shadow was deep and black and
     secret as a well.
 
~~~
I’m having trouble understanding the wife.
The wife seems like she is only there as a foil to your actions.
I want to know how the wife feels when you drag her
and your son down into the basement to start a new religion.
The religion has something to do with cowering
before a force greater than yourself and then being buried alive.
I want to know how the wife behaves in small, enclosed spaces:
if she is trying to comfort your son by telling him Daddy likes
to play funny games, or if she is already visualizing
herself walking into a women’s shelter, your son
on her back and maybe, because this is a fantasy,
she carries a burning torch, like an angry villager, or a goddess.
Does the wife merit any revenge after you weed whack
the coffee table? Does she agree with you that the coffee table
is yours to destroy because you built it? What has she built
in the house that is hers to destroy? What kind of childhood
has the wife endured that allows her to understand you?
In her past life or lives, was the wife ever a shepherdess?
Does she see you as a sort of Pan, goatish, and pricked
by ticks, but also very well-endowed? When the wife transforms
into a tree can she still think or is she just a green haze
inside, an idea of growing? I would like to see the wife
peel off that bark, leaving only enough for modesty’s sake,
although as this is your poem, we can take a bit more off.
I want to see her uproot herself, pick up the house and shake it.
How many people fall out?
The wife has something about her the Germans
would call unheimlich. I sometimes catch a glimpse of the wife
out of the corner of my eye but then I look away.
I cannot look directly at the wife. The wife is a conflagration
of everything dear. I wonder sometimes if she is faking;
There is a certain note she holds too long
so the orgasm is more operatic, less genuine.
When she cries, Oh my God, really, she should stutter.
Let’s say the wife wakes up in the morning.
You have already made breakfast. Does your kindness feel oppressive?
Does she want to take your weed whacker through the house?
Has she ever, in a fit of anger, destroyed your pornography?
When you found a picture of the wife online with a foreign handprint
smacked red on her ass, how quickly did your shock turn to arousal?
Are you aware the wife is breaking down in public places,
and sometimes cannot move for thirty minutes? Sometimes
her arm goes entirely numb from the shoulder down. I think the wife
might need some fine-tuning, some elbow grease,
some wrenching apart, and then reassembling.
~~~
My shadow followed me to San Diego
   silently, she never complained.
No green card, no identity pass,
   she is wedded to my fate.
The moon is a drunk and anorectic,
   constantly reeling, changing weight.
My shadow dances grotesquely,
   resentful she can't leave me.
The moon mourns his unwritten novels,
   cries naked into the trees and fades.
Tomorrow, he'll return to beat me
   blue—again, again and again.
Goodbye Moon, goodbye Shadow.
   My husband, my lover, I'm late.
The sun will plunge through the window.
   I must make my leap of faith.
~~~
It would not sound so deep
Were it a Firmamental Product—
Airs no Oceans keep—
—Emily Dickinson



Afloat between your lens   
and your gaze,   
the last consideration to go   
across my gray matter   
and its salubrious   
deliquescence   
is   
whether or not I’ll swim,   
whether I’ll be able to breathe,   
whether I’ll live like before.   
I’m caught in the bubble   
of your breath.   
It locks me in.   
Drives me mad.   
Confined to speak alone,   
I talk and listen,   
ask questions and answer myself.   
I hum, I think I sing,   
I breathe in, breathe in and don’t explode.   
I’m no one.   
Behind the wall   
of hydrogen and oxygen,   
very clear, almost illuminated,   
you allow me to think   
that the Root of the Wind is Water
and the atmosphere   
smells of salt and microbes and intimacy.
And in that instant comes   
the low echo   
of a beyond beyond,   
a language archaic and soaked   
in syllables and accents suited   
for re-de-trans-forming,   
giving light,   
giving birth to   
melanin   
hidden within another skin:   
the hollow echo of the voice   
which speaks alone.   
~~~
In the ocean one fish
swallows the other:
a geometric progression of
loss.
You are bigger than I.
The calamity of love
swelling out larger than us.
And what destiny partakes of
our dilemma?
Swallows the cause and effect:
eyes and kissing mouths and enlarged
parts wanting to breathe and wanting. 
There is no gentle sense to this.
Is there?
Only a kind of terror
at the chain
of events, the scale of loss, the ordered 
destruction one against the other—
all that something larger
awaits its moment. 
~~~
But sometimes I forget where I am,
Imagine myself inside that life again.
 
Recalcitrant mornings. Sun perhaps,
Or more likely colorless light
 
Filtering its way through shapeless cloud.
 
And when I begin to believe I haven’t left,
The rest comes back. Our couch. My smoke
 
Climbing the walls while the hours fall.
Straining against the noise of traffic, music,
 
Anything alive, to catch your key in the door.
And that scamper of feeling in my chest,
 
As if the day, the night, wherever it is
I am by then, has been only a whir
 
Of something other than waiting.
 
We hear so much about what love feels like.
Right now, today, with the rain outside,
 
And leaves that want as much as I do to believe
In May, in seasons that come when called,
 
It’s impossible not to want
To walk into the next room and let you
 
Run your hands down the sides of my legs,
Knowing perfectly well what they know.
~~~
Stone by stone, body by body in the grass: For this we trade our lone compass, Become swans instead, adrift in glaze- Light, kilned in the arms of each other Into vessel-vassal new. Or shrew, As the case may be. What would you do?  Listen to the footsteps in the thistles. Put the kettle on for tea, and whisper it to me.
~~~
go on sister sing your song
lady redbone señora rubia
took all day long
shampooing her nubia
she gets to the getting place
without or with him
must I holler when   
you’re giving me rhythm
members don’t get weary   
add some practice to your theory
she wants to know is it a men thing
or a him thing
wishing him luck   
she gave him lemons to suck
told him please dear
improve your embouchure
~~~
You have a beautiful mouth,Luigi, the man-boy says. The rubber rafthas floated far from shore. The choiceis this:medusa sea,a boil of   jellied lashes,or face the kiss.
~~~
My mother is dying of too much electricity on the brain, my father, a limp in his walk, & my macho lost his green card at a bus station. I want words split letter for letter to turn sound into wisdom on my losses.
 

•
 

My macho says: Your skin is the color of milk, you glow between sheets. ¿Who gives more light: me, or the luna lunera? Too much milk makes you sick — drink, drink, cascabelera.
 

•
 

I want to leave my hembra behind. ¿What are my options? She bleeds on the rug, births a litter, then hides limp bodies in kitchen cabinets.
 

•
 

I lied. My father is dying of too much electricity on the brain, my macho, a limp in his walk, & my mother lost her green card at a bus station. Who these losses happened to matter to no one but me. To others, my loss is only worth its sum parts.
 

•
 

I pour a shot to get the flies drunk. Watch their little legs stagger. I like the flies tipsy, like my macho likes me when I am glazed on the kitchen floor, begging him not to leave me.
 

•
 

Come kill me over the stove, under the running shower head, gravel my skin bloody. I am so afraid one night my macho will choke me to death, though I am not afraid of dying.
 

•
 

My macho says: Hembra, I imagine the woman I love when I’m with you, but you’re not that woman. I ask: Who is she? My macho says: Cállate, take off your dress. Each of   his fingers strokes death. I only want to die. So I die, una y otra vez.
~~~
Why do you subdue yourself in golds and purples?   
Why do you dim yourself with folded silks?
Do you not see that I can buy brocades in any draper’s shop,   
And that I am choked in the twilight of all these colors.
How pale you would be, and startling—  
How quiet;
But your curves would spring upward   
Like a clear jet of flung water,
You would quiver like a shot-up spray of water,   
You would waver, and relapse, and tremble.   
And I too should tremble,
Watching.
Murex-dyes and tinsel—
And yet I think I could bear your beauty unshaded.
~~~
Two sisters of ancient Greece both laid claimTo the finest, fairest rear of their time.Which tail forged ahead? Which bottom’s true fameTopped? Which back was in front, which terce most prime?A judge chose the elder girl’s back matter;Her finish was more fine and far matter.She got the prize, and his heart; soon they wed.“But the younger’s sitter’s not a smatterLess meet; I’ll marry her,” his brother said.It went so well, their joys were so perfected,That after them a temple was erectedIn honor of  Venus Callipygus.No other church — though I don’t know its rite —Could so, from head to epididymis,Move me with deep devotion to its site.        Translated from the French of  Jean de La Fontaine, Contes, Part I, 6.
~~~
I lived with visions for my company, Instead of men and women, years ago, And found them gentle mates, nor thought to know A sweeter music than they played to me. But soon their trailing purple was not free Of this world's dust, — their lutes did silent grow, And I myself grew faint and blind below Their vanishing eyes. Then THOU didst come ... to be, Belovèd, what they seemed. Their shining fronts, Their songs, their splendours, (better, yet the same, As river-water hallowed into fonts) Met in thee, and from out thee overcame My soul with satisfaction of all wants — Because God's gifts put man's best dreams to shame.
~~~
Yesterday I found my pipe while pondering a long evening of work, of fine winter work. Thrown aside were my cigarettes, with all the childish joys of summer, into the past which the leaves shining blue in the sun, the muslins, illuminate, and taken up once again was the grave pipe of a serious man who wants to smoke for a long while without being disturbed, so as better to work: but I was not prepared for the surprise that this abandoned object had in store for me; for hardly had I drawn the first puff when I forgot the grand books I was planning to write, and, amazed, moved to a feeling of tenderness, I breathed in the air of the previous winter which was now coming back to me. I had not been in contact with my faithful sweetheart since returning to France, and now all of London, London as I had lived it a year ago entirely alone, appeared before my eyes: first the dear fogs that muffle one’s brains and have an odor of their own there when they penetrate beneath the casements. My tobacco had the scent of a somber room with leather furniture sprinkled by coal dust, on which the thin black cat would curl and stretch; the big fires! and the maid with red arms pouring coals, and the noise of those coals falling from the sheet-iron bucket into the iron scuttle in the morning—when the postman gave the solemn double knock that kept me alive! Once again I saw through the windows those sickly trees of the deserted square—I saw the open sea, crossed so often that winter, shivering on the deck of the steamer wet with drizzle and blackened from the fumes—with my poor wandering beloved, decked out in traveller’s clothes, a long dress, dull as the dust of the roads, a coat clinging damply to her cold shoulders, one of those straw hats with no feather and hardly any ribbons that wealthy ladies throw away upon arrival, mangled as they are by the sea, and that poor loved ones refurbish for many another season. Around her neck was wound the terrible handkerchief that one waves when saying goodbye forever.
~~~
The sculptures in this gallery have been                        
carefully treated with a protective wax                           
so that visitors may touch them.                                     
~~~
For John Ashbery



“Good Barber of the Pea!” I exhumed,
high into the vag
where the barber keeps his
pea — 
“Good Sprout!” His mouth, his gray,
hunted tongue,
always in the distance — 
“No use denying
we master the particular service
we deny ourselves. In the shade of this pea
(the sum of his shade and the gavel
flexing above his head)
I will become
a milliner to cover what work I’ve
done. Or else, I’ll begin anew
at the infant chin,
where nothing grows but chins!
Outside, snails, vines, surpass me
and must — gaining pews upon
pews. But don’t think for a sec
I don’t know the way out of here, that release is
one hair — spiral stair — top of which
cleavage evaporates”
~~~
Ye tender young virgins attend to my lay,
 My heart is divided in twain;My Collin is beautiful, witty, and gay,
 And Damon’s a kind-hearted swain.Whenever my lovely young Collin I meet,
 What pleasures arise in my breast;The dear gentle swain looks so charming and sweet,
 I fancy I love him the best.But when my dear Damon does to me complain,
 So tender, so loving and kind,My bosom is softened to hear the fond swain,
 And Collin slips out of my mind.Whenever my Damon repeats his soft tale,
 My heart overflows with delight;But when my dear Collin appears in the vale,
 I languish away at the sight.’Tis Collin alone shall possess my fond heart, 
 Now Damon for ever adieu;But can I? — I cannot from Damon thus part!
 He’s loved me so long, and so true.My heart to my Damon I’ll instantly bind,
 And on him will fix all my care;But, O should I be to my Collin unkind,
 He surely will die with despair.How happy, how happy with Damon I’d been,
 If Collin I never had knew;As happy with Collin, if I’d never seen
 My Damon, so tender and true.
~~~
lives on an island
of last-ditch attempts
and ancient consolations
 
after the shipwreck
she swam ashore near naked
hands scraped raw on coral
bra and panties soaked through
sand in her teeth
lapped by aftermath
lying exhausted
slowly approaching
the condition of music
 
he loved her stubborn luster
sure they argued sometimes
the word "argue" from Latin
meaning to make clear
while she sat quietly
in the wing chair
her eyes closed
police ransacked his desk
the note turned up in his pocket
with the letter for his sister
a baseball ticket stub
receipts for two "taco platters"he whose soul was bound up with mine
and part of a bookmark
 
six weeks later she looks great
thin and translucent
a statue of justice sans blindfold
she wears beautiful blouses now
peach, gold, seedling green
her complexion
has never been better
lushness nips at the heels
of destruction
 
tonight's lurid sunset's
a cocktail of too many boozes
she'd like to switch it off
via remote control
but there's no antidote
for celestial events
 
a frantic bat takes a wrong turn
from the attic veers
into her living
room, bounces off walls
a sick flut-thud each time it hits
the suicide's wife
pulls out her roasting pan
climbs the kitchen counter
teeters and grabs
for twenty minutes
at last claps on the lid
walks her prize outside
 
releases the creature
into the trees
where the lawn peters out
where the idea that at death
something is liberated
can flap blackly away.
~~~
She turned to gold and fell in love.
She danced life upside down.
She opened her wild eyes again
and asked some strangers in.
The strangers felt her in and out.
They found her outsides thin.
Since her heart was still and hard,
they knocked her insides in.
~~~
There was ance a may, and she lo’ed na men;She biggit her bonnie bow’r doun i’ yon glen;But now she cries, Dool and a well-a-day!Come doun the green gait and come here away!When bonnie young Johnnie cam’ owre the seaHe said he saw naething sae lovely as me;He hecht me baith rings and monie braw things;And werena my heart licht, I wad dee.He had a wee tittie that lo’ed na me,Because I was twice as bonnie as she;She raised sic a pother ‘twixt him and his mother,That werena my heart licht, I wad dee.The day it was set, and the bridal to beThe wife took a dwam and lay doun to dee;She maned, and she graned, out o’ dolour and pain,Till he vowed that he ne’er wad see me again.His kin was for ane o’ a higher degree,Said, what had he do wi’ the likes o’ me?Albeit I was bonnie, I wasna for Johnnie:And werena my heart licht, I wad dee.They said I had neither cow nor calf,Nor dribbles o’ drink rins through the draff,Nor pickles o’meal rins through the mill-e’e;An werena my heart licht, I wad dee.His tittie she was baith wily and slee,She spied me as I cam’ owre the lea,And then she ran in and made a loud din;Believe your ain een an ye trow na me.His bannet stood aye fu’ round on his browHis auld ane looked aye as weel as some’s new;But now he lets ’t wear ony gate it will hing,And casts himsel’ dowie upon the corn-bing.And now he gaes daund’ring about the dykesA a’ he dow do is to hund the tykes;The love-lang nicht he ne’er steeks his e’e;And werena my heart licht I wad dee.Were I but young for thee, as I ha’e beenWe should ha’e been gallopin’ doun in yon green,And linkin’ it on the lily-white lea;And wow, gin I were but young for thee.
~~~
She pronounces Chama the name of the milky green river
with a richness in the ch I cannot muster, puts a hard d
on the end of her ands. anD. anD. anD. Like the river
she is asking to be endless anD shifting. To stream.
I’d scouted the knoll of oaks for rattlers, being beyond the bounds
of Coverage having no means to learn their habits.
So I lay down with her on the ground. Their ground. AnD
I willed to forget the cares of my later-in-life job search. Job.
Which is also Job, a man in the Bible. Which is a book.
The oaks of the knoll were leaning into the Chama like girls
washing their hair in basins. I thought of EB shampooing Lota,
of Frost’s birches, of Plath’s Wych elms which I’d like to have
googled. Did snakes favor oak knolls? Did Georgia O’Keeffe worry
about health insurance costs in Abiquiú? AnD beside me my love
streaming, her poodles distantly nosing the chamisa. Standards.
I thought I had them. Put art at the front of the queue
wych is different from quiú. AnD now this. Biblical
the proportions of this breaking-back-into-a-country-I’d-
locked-myself-out-of phase. Was it scenic? I liked
the pachysandra, branches of oak taking all that space
from the sky. But then everybody disappeared to their offices.
Three times I wrote work work work when woke
was what I wanted to write.
Miniature is the acorn
I fingered in the soft flour-sack pocket of my jeans.
Acorn smaller than East Coast or indeed Irish Oak varieties
wych she handed me anD how hungrily I pocketed its little body.
~~~
Cold in the earth—and the deep snow piled above thee,Far, far removed, cold in the dreary grave!Have I forgot, my only Love, to love thee,Severed at last by Time's all-severing wave?Now, when alone, do my thoughts no longer hoverOver the mountains, on that northern shore,Resting their wings where heath and fern-leaves coverThy noble heart forever, ever more?Cold in the earth—and fifteen wild Decembers,From those brown hills, have melted into spring:Faithful, indeed, is the spirit that remembersAfter such years of change and suffering!Sweet Love of youth, forgive, if I forget thee,While the world's tide is bearing me along;Other desires and other hopes beset me,Hopes which obscure, but cannot do thee wrong!No later light has lightened up my heaven,No second morn has ever shone for me;All my life's bliss from thy dear life was given,All my life's bliss is in the grave with thee.But, when the days of golden dreams had perished,And even Despair was powerless to destroy,Then did I learn how existence could be cherished,Strengthened, and fed without the aid of joy.Then did I check the tears of useless passion—Weaned my young soul from yearning after thine;Sternly denied its burning wish to hastenDown to that tomb already more than mine.And, even yet, I dare not let it languish,Dare not indulge in memory's rapturous pain;Once drinking deep of that divinest anguish,How could I seek the empty world again?
~~~
Regla lesbia: Flexible rule that may be adjusted to any
body to be measured. Compare regla fija: standard. 
                                                    —The Velázquez Dictionary



I.
In the garden, it’s there. Even when you’re inside you feel it,
as though it were you standing naked among the weeds,
 
the tips of the bougainvillea bursting into flame, your nipples
ruffled like the skin of a lake by a breeze.
 
You worship the invisible body like an old-fashioned lover, from afar,
loving the specificity of space between you.
 
Sometimes at night it stretches out on the empty side
of the bed, stares at you with the length of its invisible surface.
 
Every contour of your body not filled by you is molded
by the attentiveness of the invisible body, whose breath surrounds
     you.
 
It’s more than prayer it wants—more than language, with its
     conditions.
The invisible body demands you invent new senses to receive it,
 
new places on your body to marvel at its subtlety,
like the eyes of the deaf percussionist that perceive sound.
 
II.
The invisible body wants you to become a satellite dish,
tuned to what exists only because your body calls to it.
 
Like the woman who had her kitchen remodeled to make room
for the microwave she’d entered a contest for. Then won.
 
III.
When asked whether falling in love was about acquisitiveness,
about the ego, the seventy-five-year-old poet
 
responded that the ego had nothing to do with it;
it was the need for union with the beloved.
 
Rumi asks, Who is it we spend our entire lives loving? 
 
IV.
How, then, do you measure the invisible body,
which resists commitment but is faithful?
 
Is it clear who the beloved is, when no clear
body exists that can be measured against a standard?
 
V.
The invisible body sometimes acquires a body—it’s so convincing,
it takes you a while to figure out it’s really the invisible body.
 
Like someone who has been reading your journal,
it has decoded from your petty, daily complaints the open sesame
 
that slides the stone from the hidden cave’s opening
and cleans you out while you sleep, leaving a sarcastic note.
 
It wants you to know it was doing you a favor, besides,
how else did you think you’d discover the cave’s precise location?
 
When Aphrodite sharpens you, you sacrifice a little of yourself,
willingly, as a knife does, so that you may become better at it.
 
VI.
This is the point at which the invisible body speaks
in italics, the Ouija board of poetry.
 In my mind, says the invisible body, that time capsule shuttlingthrough space, I hold, in all the languages of the world,
 your love, rushed like holographic platters to a table,steaming into the future long after you’ve ceased to shine,
 the silver faces of your beloved bobbing out of the darkness,the black velvet pillow of your life on which you offer them for view.
 
VII.
The invisible body is created out of your longing, your longing
compressing invisible molecules together into an absence you
     recognize.
 
That is the way one blind man sees the world—after the fact,
in photographs he took, once he had passed through it.
~~~
Turning to watch you leave,I see we must always walk towardother loves, river of   heavenbetween two office buildings. Orphaned cloud, fish soup poppling,book spined in the open palm. Unstoppable light.I think it is all right.Or do tonight, garden toada speaking stone,young sound in an old heart.Annul the self? I float it,a day lily in my wine. Oblivion?I love our lives,keeping me from it.
~~~
In the absence of anything as definitive as blood typeor maths, I am delighted to declareI found the back to the earring, alsothe mildew is banished, albeit temporarily.I want to share this news with you,a check against the inventory of living.Personalized necklaces point to living.Customizable anything suggests it’s all worth it.Sometimes it’s “oh this iced finger bun”others it’s “put something in the diary to look forward to.”This is an elaborate mural in an ill-frequented part of the city.My diary is full and the bakery is out of buns.Indoors there needs to be a swap from idle teaselsto cacti. (Some sort of permanence that works in the way I work — water, light, a finger touch confirming my edges.)I only have cats to verify I’m there. • I am building up evidence. Some bodily. Some constructed.On balance, perhaps I am more a person who racks upindicators of taste as proof of living. There are condiments,playlists, preferred linens. I first got drunkon Cinzano. There was no one taking notes. I used to dreamof sex in a fully upholstered room with no windows or doors.This idea of rabbit fur rugs and buttoned velvet cushions,immaculately conceived. Always snagged on the detailof things — how even did I come to be inside,nevermind out. The sex wasn’t the point. What I seekis magic like an intact lipstick mirror in an antique handbag,my own nifty (crackerjack?) endurance. Or to discovera gulping heart within a privet hedge. Or the druzy quartzof someone’s eyes long gone and to say it!• I am dying to be written about in your diaryand my self-involvement extends to endlessphotographs of my eye makeup, which might be describedas “signature.” FYI I prefer a fine brush to a pen.What can be said about slush, about the corners cut when cleaningthe fridge. What can be said about what is consideredto be ordinary. Crucially, love is a desireto be a witness and be witnessed, how you might skatepast the provisional. If the house were burning downI would rescue all the photographs
~~~
You jerk you didn't call me up
I haven't seen you in so long
You probably have a fucking tan
& besides that instead of making love tonight
You're drinking your parents to the airport
I'm through with you bourgeois boys
All you ever do is go back to ancestral comforts
Only money can get—even Catullus was rich but
Nowadays you guys settle for a couch
By a soporific color cable t.v. set
Instead of any arc of love, no wonder
The G.I. Joe team blows it every other time
Wake up! It's the middle of the night
You can either make love or die at the hands of the Cobra Commander
_________________
To make love, turn to page 121.
To die, turn to page 172.
~~~
He— You saw the way her body looked at me            all address                      calling me down   she was so          well-turned,                      curve and volume her body presented itself—          Clay—                      I could mold it She— You were taboo   not totem— covered her   though your wing gave no shelter Your pale plumage   became shadow   Your beak caught   in the net of her hair He— When I entered her          her death became my life   in her death swoon          she fell away from me   the more she fell          the deeper I pursued her   the deeper I went          the more lost she became   her body          became a forest of echoes   hills and valleys          echoing each other, a language I didn't know—          surrounded: alone She— The discarded body   lies in long grass   Flies and wasps   fumble there— on a summer day   the lost girl hums— Kelly, Sarah, Joanne changed   into parable Prodigal hair   flung out                body agape   like a question The scavenger crow knows— she's beautiful, outgrowing her name   in the noon heat
~~~
24.
Zachary talks about wanting to be with someone because he
feels like he can be a better person for someone else. He says he
doesn't know what he's doing, wishes he had someone to do
things for. I tell him I think we are very different people.
Theory as pure verbalism: a generated knowledge with
negative impact.
If I begin to miss someone,  I think, "Life is bad anyway."
~~~
I make a knife of words.I sit here waiting.I play with crumbs.Her eyes that should lookstraight at me aretoward the window, glazed—husband’s horizon?Not armored. Only armedwith pots and pans.Not out of arm’s reach,beyond curtains of doorbells,garden gates.She puts up ironworkin her eyes; it draws a boltover what’s real—then looks at me.I wish I’d brought my saw.
~~~
She sat on his lap for hours
pressed his face to her
large pink breasts    her hands
moved through his hair
like fond snakesshe gave him curls, cleft
hooves beneath the flesh
marvellous flesh, and smooth shoulders
~~~
I shall never get you put together entirely,
Pieced, glued, and properly jointed.
Mule-bray, pig-grunt and bawdy cackles
Proceed from your great lips.
It’s worse than a barnyard.
 
Perhaps you consider yourself an oracle,
Mouthpiece of the dead, or of some god or other.
Thirty years now I have labored
To dredge the silt from your throat.
I am none the wiser.
 
Scaling little ladders with glue pots and pails of lysol
I crawl like an ant in mourning
Over the weedy acres of your brow
To mend the immense skull plates and clear
The bald, white tumuli of your eyes.
 
A blue sky out of the Oresteia
Arches above us. O father, all by yourself
You are pithy and historical as the Roman Forum.
I open my lunch on a hill of black cypress.
Your fluted bones and acanthine hair are littered
 
In their old anarchy to the horizon-line.
It would take more than a lightning-stroke
To create such a ruin.
Nights, I squat in the cornucopia
Of your left ear, out of the wind,
 
Counting the red stars and those of plum-color.
The sun rises under the pillar of your tongue.
My hours are married to shadow.
No longer do I listen for the scrape of a keel
On the blank stones of the landing.
 
~~~
You made me cry in cruel stations,So I missed many trains. You married others In plausible buildings. The subsequent sonBecame my boss. You promised me nothingBut blamed me for doubting when who wouldn’t.If  I knew how to please you — who have found Out my faults. In dreams I’m wild with guilt. Have pityKill it. Then, when I’ve lost all hope,Kiss me again, your mouth so open — I’d give anything for one more night — That I go without thought. Don’t bite. No,Mark me. My husband already knowsExactly what owns me.
~~~
Talking, we begin to find the way into
our hearts, we who knew no words,
words being a rare commodity
in those countries we left behind.
Both refugees and similarly deprived,
we marvel at the many things there
are to say: so many variations
and colors of the same thought, so
many different lengths in the words
that line up together on our tongues.
No scarcity, no rationing, no
waiting in line in order to buy
the same answer we heard each time
we asked, that one word, owned by
the state, manufactured by the state,
serving all purposes equally alike:
No, No, No, and sometimes Never.
~~~
Cyclones
of ecstatic dust
and ashes whirl
crusaders
from hallucinatory citadels
of shattered glass
into evacuate craters
 
A flock of dreams
browse on Necropolis
 
From the shores
of oval oceans
in the oxidized Orient
 
Onyx-eyed Odalisques
and ornithologists
observe the flight
of Eros obsolete
 
And "Immortality"
mildews
in the museums of the moon
~~~
Would but indulgent Fortune sendTo me a kind, and faithful Friend,One who to Virtue’s Laws is true,And does her nicest Rules pursue;One Pious, Lib’ral, Just and Brave,And to his Passions not a Slave;Who full of Honour, void of Pride,Will freely praise, and freely chide;But not indulge the smallest Fault,Nor entertain one slighting Thought:Who still the same will ever prove,Will still instruct and still will love:In whom I safely may confide,And with him all my Cares divide:Who has a large capacious Mind,Join’d with a Knowledge unconfin’d:A Reason bright, a Judgement true,A Wit both quick, and solid too:Who can of all things talk with Ease,And whose Converse will ever please:Who charm’d with Wit, and inward Graces,Despises Fools with tempting Faces;And still a beauteous Mind does prizeAbove the most enchanting Eyes:I would not envy Queens their State,Nor once desire a happier Fate.
~~~
On village green whose smooth and well-worn sod, Cross pathed, with many a gossip’s foot is trod; By cottage door where playful children run, And cats and curs sit basking in the sun; Where o’er an earthen seat the thorn is bent, Cross-armed and back to wall poor William leant His bonnet all awry, his gathered brow, His hanging lip and lengthened visage show A mind but ill at ease. With motions strange His listless limbs their wayward postures change; While many a crooked line and curious maze With clouted shoon he on the sand portrays. At length the half-chewed straw fell from his mouth, And to himself low spoke the moody youth.    ‘How simple is the lad and reft of skill, Who thinks with love to fix a woman’s will: Who every Sunday morn, to please her sight, Knots up his neckcloth gay and hosen white; Who for her pleasure keeps his pockets bare, And half his wages spends on pedlar’s ware; When every niggard clown or dotard old, Who hides in secret nooks his oft-told gold, Whose field or orchard tempts, with all her pride, At little cost may win her for his bride! While all the meed her silly lover gains, Is but the neighbours’ jeering for his pains. On Sunday last, when Susan’s banns were read, And I astonished sat with hanging head, Cold grew my shrinking frame, and loose my knee, While every neighbour’s eye was fixed on me. Ah Sue! when last we worked at Hodge’s hay, And still at me you mocked in wanton play — When last at fair, well pleased by chapman’s stand, You took the new-bought fairing from my hand — When at old Hobb’s you sung that song so gay, ‘Sweet William,’ still the burthen of the lay, — I little thought, alas! the lots were cast, That thou shouldst be another’s bride at last; And had, when last we tripped it on the green, And laughed at stiff-backed Rob, small thought I ween, Ere yet another scanty month was flown To see thee wedded to the hateful clown. Ay, lucky churl! more gold thy pockets line, But did these shapely limbs resemble thine, I’d stay at home and tend the household gear, Nor on the green with other lads appear. Ay, lucky churl! no store thy cottage lacks, And round thy barn thick stand the sheltered stacks. But did such features coarse my visage grace, I’d never budge the bonnet from my face. Yet let it be; it shall not break my ease, He best deserves who doth the maiden please. Such silly cause no more shall give me pain, Nor ever maiden cross my rest again. Such grizzled suitors with their taste agree, And the black fiend may take them all for me!’ Now through the village rose confused sounds, Hoarse lads, and children shrill, and yelping hounds. Straight every housewife at her door is seen, And pausing hedgers on their mattocks lean. At every narrow lane and alley’s mouth Loud-laughing lasses stand, and joking youth. A bridal band tricked out in colours gay, With minstrels blithe before to cheer the way, From clouds of curling dust that onward fly, In rural splendour break upon the eye. As in their way they hold so gaily on, Caps, beads, and buttons, glancing in the sun, Each village wag with eye of roguish cast, Some maiden jogs and vents the ready jest; While village toasts the passing belles deride, And sober matrons marvel at their pride. But William, head erect, with settled brow, In sullen silence viewed the passing show; And oft he scratched his pate with careless grace, And scorned to pull the bonnet o’er his face; But did with steady look unaltered wait, Till hindmost man had passed the churchyard gate, Then turned him to his cot with visage flat, Where honest Lightfoot on the threshold sat. Up leaped the kindly beast his hand to lick, And for his pains received an angry kick. Loud shuts the door with harsh and thundering din; The echoes round their circling course begin, From cot to cot, church tower, and rocky dell, It grows amain with wide progressive swell, And Lightfoot joins the coil with long and piteous yell.
~~~
Things happen when you drink too much mescal.
One night, with not enough food in my belly,
he kept on buying.   I’m a girl who’ll fall
damn near in love with gratitude and, well, he
was hot and generous and so the least
that I could do was let him kiss me, hard
and soft and any way you want it, beast
and beauty, lime and salt—sweet Bacchus’ pards—
and when his friend showed up I felt so warm
and generous I let him kiss me too.
His buddy asked me if it was the worm
inside that makes me do the things I do.
I wasn’t sure which worm he meant, the one
I ate?   The one that eats at me alone?
~~~
It is eighty degrees in December.
It is he, on one of his furloughs,
bringing himself — and hell — up to date.My Don Juan, the better climber
(as the mercury yo-yos),is in a newly roused state,
the world circumcised away
from an out-of-season bud
leaving at the scrupulous rim,as it unfurls, a darker appliqué,
like O-positive frozen solidat the sight of one’s resuscitated victim.
This rosebush assiduously forks over
its works where most grandifloras falter,
thriving as far into the year as Capricorn.While named after a lover,
it decorates its own altarand wields an extraordinary thorn:
once I saw it catch a football
in those semiquaver quasi-teeth;
it is three-headed, like Cerberus,a hybrid drawing bloodlines from a root-ball
on hands all that’s impure lies beneath.Hands can train it, barbarous
as it is, on an arbor, and I might like
to take its thick canes in harness,
first pouring cement as a base(so it would know I meant business).
Always poised to strike,they eventually undo their stays,
baying out like a window
of garnet, as at Chartres
(torture chamber in its basement,or so I hear). I wonder how
such a daemon rose got its start,what fairy tale explains its scent    ...    
And then I go out tonight
and find him, swiping right
on every pretty face in candlelight.It is almost Christmas. Stacks
of square plates. (It’s an open plan.) Racksof bottles. The whites and blacks,
clear glass, and stainless steel sieves
denote compliance with standards.
A wire basket of freckled pearsis transparency; sterilized knives
give full disclosure; and as regardsthe stemware, due diligence dares
a slip, especially on chanteuses like these
salting down from state-of-the-art speakers.
(Or is it sugar?) Does the chorizo flambénot deter him? Gold as all hell, Valkyries
stand tall with beer to the brim. Beakersin Siren form flush with Chianti, if not ambi-
valence. Recalling the steel meshes
belting Monterosso’s
cliffs against the voxDei of the sea, the myth refleshes:
ordering, in the manner of heroes,an Andromeda on the rocks.
~~~
My own dear love, he is strong and bold
      And he cares not what comes after.
His words ring sweet as a chime of gold,
      And his eyes are lit with laughter.
He is jubilant as a flag unfurled—
      Oh, a girl, she’d not forget him.
My own dear love, he is all my world,—
      And I wish I’d never met him.
My love, he’s mad, and my love, he’s fleet,
      And a wild young wood-thing bore him!
The ways are fair to his roaming feet,
      And the skies are sunlit for him.
As sharply sweet to my heart he seems
      As the fragrance of acacia.
My own dear love, he is all my dreams,—
      And I wish he were in Asia.
My love runs by like a day in June,
      And he makes no friends of sorrows.
He’ll tread his galloping rigadoon
      In the pathway of the morrows.
He’ll live his days where the sunbeams start,
      Nor could storm or wind uproot him.
My own dear love, he is all my heart,—
      And I wish somebody’d shoot him.
~~~
If endear is earned
and is meant to identify   
two halves
then it composes   
one meaning
which means   
a token
a knot   
a note
a noting in the head   
of how it feels
to have your heart   
be the dear one
~~~
White people leave the express
at 96th Street, collectively,
like pigeons from a live wire
or hope from the hearts of Harlem.
And I’m one of them, although
my lover sleeps two stops north between
Malcolm X and Adam Clayton Powell
Boulevards, wishing my ass
were cupped inside her knees and belly,
wishing this in a dream thick
with inequalities.
 
I live on Riverside Drive. My face
helped get me here. I was
ruddy with anticipation the day
I interviewed for the rooms
near the park with its
snow-covered maples. I was full
of undisguised hope as I
strolled along the river, believing
I belonged there, that my people
inherited this wonderland
unequivocally, as if they deserved it.
 
My lover buys twinkies from the Arabs,
bootleg tapes on ‘25th,
and carries a blade in her back
pocket although her hands
are the gentlest I’ve known.
She ignores the piss smells
on the corner, the sirens
at 4 A.M., the men whose brains
have dissolved in rum. And tries
to trust a white woman who
sleeps near the trees of Riverside.
 
When we go out together,
we avoid expensive
cafés on Columbus Avenue, jaunts
to the Upper East Side. Harlem
eyes us suspiciously or with
contempt beneath half-closed lids.
We have friends there,
hidden in the ruins like gold, who
accept us. When it snows,
we walk boldly anywhere, as if the snow
were a protection, or a death.
~~~
On paunchy green hills
in some province of China, you are the one I speak to.
Someone buys a perfume, recalling
that the bones of his beloved are small.
When he writes the note, when he wraps
the little bottle, he takes that into account. So do I.
The subtlest trace of mind against your shoulders
is your true skin. And I press myself to you.
I hear the steady rhythm of your typing, the key
of a borrowed pulse. But what difference does it make, that it is given?
For a while it is mine to use, then your turn, but the pulse originates
in the Child of Heaven who has hearts to spare.
Some day you'll sink yourself into a frozen
lake where paper ships were torched with the
names of the missing. Some dead, some vanished.
The flames consume all but
the wisp of smoke on which a single word rises
and water licks at the rest. So we are freed from a weight.
Perennially your hills are filled with birds.
Green hills, the deep mosses around your temples.
They, the birds, are your faithful ones.
As I am, naturally.
Faithful to a world unknown,
a world for us alone, paper-thin, and too fragile to speak of.
~~~
even if we won’t admit it.  Getting off the subway at Canal St. —   I wonder if the author is a man or a woman? A teen? A team?
~~~
Child, with many a childish wile,
Timid look, and blushing smile,
Downy wings to steal thy way,
Gilded bow, and quiver gay,
Who in thy simple mien would trace
The tyrant of the human race?
Who is he whose flinty heart
Hath not felt the flying dart?
Who is he that from the wound
Hath not pain and pleasure found?
Who is he that hath not shed
Curse and blessing on thy head?
~~~
You keep me waiting in a truck
with its one good wheel stuck in the ditch,   
while you piss against the south side of a tree.
Hurry. I’ve got nothing on under my skirt tonight.   
That still excites you, but this pickup has no windows   
and the seat, one fake leather thigh,   
pressed close to mine is cold.   
I’m the same size, shape, make as twenty years ago,   
but get inside me, start the engine;   
you’ll have the strength, the will to move.   
I’ll pull, you push, we’ll tear each other in half.
Come on, baby, lay me down on my back.   
Pretend you don’t owe me a thing   
and maybe we’ll roll out of here,   
leaving the past stacked up behind us;
old newspapers nobody’s ever got to read again.
~~~
If you press a stone with your finger,
Sir Isaac Newton observed,
The finger is also
Pressed by the stone.
But can a woman, pressed by memory’s finger,
In the deep night, alone,
Of her softness move
The airy thing
That presses upon her
With the whole weight of love? This
Sir Isaac said nothing of.
~~~
for B. H.



I didn’t fall in love. I fell through it:
Came out the other side moments later, hands full of matter, waking up from the dream of a bullet tearing through the middle of my body.
I no longer understand anything for longer than a long moment, or the time it takes to receive the shot.
This kind of gravity is like falling through a cloud, forgetting it all, and then being told about it later. On the day you fell through a cloud . . .
It must be true. If it were not, then when did these strands of silver netting attach to my hair?
The problem was finding that you were real and not just a dream of clouds.
If you weren’t real, I would address this letter to one of two entities: myself, or everyone else. The effect would be equivalent.
The act of falling happens in time. That is, it takes long enough for the falling to shear away from the moments before and the moments after, long enough for one to have thought I am falling. I have been falling. I continue to fall.
Falling through a ring, in this case, would not mean falling through the center of the annulus—a planet floats there. Falling through the ring means falling through the spaces between the objects that together make the ring.
On the way through, clasp your fists around the universe:
Nothing but ice-gravel.
But open your hands when you reach the other side. Quickly, before it melts.   
What did I leave you?
~~~
She was in love with the same danger
everybody is. Dangerous
as it is to love a stranger,
she was in love. With that same danger
an adulteress risks a husband’s anger.
Stealthily death enters a house:
she was in love with that danger.
Everybody is dangerous.
~~~
I wanted to tell the veterinary assistant about the cat video Jason sent me
But I resisted for fear she'd think it strange
I am very lonely
Yesterday my boyfriend called me, drunk again
And interspersed between ringing tears and clinginess
He screamed at me with a kind of bitterness
No other human had before to my ears
And told me that I was no good
Well maybe he didn't mean that
But that is what I heard
When he told me my life was not worthwhile
And my life's work the work of the elite.
I say I want to save the world but really
I want to write poems all day
I want to rise, write poems, go to sleep,
Write poems in my sleep
Make my dreams poems
Make my body a poem with beautiful clothes
I want my face to be a poem
I have just learned how to apply
Eyeliner to the corners of my eyes to make them appear wide
There is a romantic abandon in me always
I want to feel the dread for others
I can feel it through song
Only through song am I able to sum up so many words into a few
Like when he said I am no good
I am no good
Goodness is not the point anymore
Holding on to things
Now that's the point
~~~
I forgot to tell you it's almost time to go.
The sun has distilled its particular worn essence
And the glittering trout is flipped on the bow.   
A man asks me what time it is. I don't know.   
I have emptied my purse and wept in the presence   
Of onlookers. I forgot to remember to go
Before eleven, when the steely arrow
Shot swimming to its underneath, tense
As a stream of salmon in reverse below
The laureled, relentless clocks. The sceptered row
Of columns dreams one o'clock, immense,   
Inviolate. What time is it? I don't know.   
This story concerns the night I tried to go—
Though many times I flopped into the silence
Of orange plastic seating like onto the bow
Of a lonely ship, and felt my breathing slow.
The frail, retreating stand of columns prevents
The clocks from telling me time and time again to go.   
At my feet, a glittering trout swims past the bow.
~~~
For Don (1958–2011)



My skiff is made of spicewood       my oars are Cassia bractMusic flows      from bow to starboard Early Mozart     cool side of  Coltrane   and miles and miles     of   Miles Cheap Californian Merlot       and my young boyfriend • If   I could master      the nine doors of my bodyAnd close my heart       to the cries of   sufferingPerhaps     I could love you like no otherFloat my mind      toward the other side of   hate• The shanty towns of   Tijuana       sing for youThe slums of   Little Sudan       hold evening prayerOne dead brown boy is a tragedy     Ten thousand is a statistic So let’s fuck    my love       until the dogs pass• All beautiful boyfriends are transitoryThey have no souls     they’re shiny brown fleshTomorrow they’ll turn into      purple festering corpsesFissured     gored    by a myriad flies• Down the Irrawaddy River       you lay yourself   to sleepNo sun no moon          no coming no goingNo causality   no personalityNo hunger     no thirst• Malarial deltas      typhoidal caysTsunamis don’t judge     Calamity grieves no oneThe poor will be submerged     the rich won’t be savedPurge the innocent     sink the depraved• What do I smell        but the perfume of   transienceCrushed calyxes         rotting phloemsLet’s write     pretty poems        pretty poems      pretty poemsMasque stale pogroms    with a sweet whiff of oblivion
~~~
We barge out of the womb   with two of them: eyes, ears,   arms, hands, legs, feet.   Only one heart.  Not a good   plan.  God should know we   need at least a dozen,   a baker’s dozen of hearts.   They break like Easter eggs   hidden in the grass,   stepped on and smashed.   My own heart is patched,   bandaged, taped, barely   the same shape it once was   when it beat fast for you.
~~~
A kiss on the forehead—erases misery.
I kiss your forehead.
A kiss on the eyes—lifts sleeplessness.
I kiss your eyes.
A kiss on the lips—is a drink of water.
I kiss your lips.
A kiss on the forehead—erases memory.1917
 
~~~
I thought once how Theocritus had sung Of the sweet years, the dear and wished for years, Who each one in a gracious hand appears To bear a gift for mortals, old or young: And, as I mused it in his antique tongue, I saw, in gradual vision through my tears, The sweet, sad years, the melancholy years, Those of my own life, who by turns had flung A shadow across me. Straightway I was 'ware, So weeping, how a mystic Shape did move Behind me, and drew me backward by the hair, And a voice said in mastery, while I strove, ... Guess now who holds thee?'—Death,' I said. But there, The silver answer rang ... Not Death, but Love.'
~~~
The time is come, I must depart    from thee, ah famous city; I never yet to rue my smart,    did find that thou had’st pity. Wherefore small cause there is, that I    should grieve from thee to go; But many women foolishly,    like me, and other moe, Do such a fixèd fancy set,    on those which least deserve, That long it is ere wit we get      away from them to swerve. But time with pity oft will tell      to those that will her try, Whether it best be more to mell,    or utterly defy. And now hath time me put in mind    of thy great cruelness, That never once a help would find,    to ease me in distress. Thou never yet would’st credit give    to board me for a year; Nor with apparel me relieve,    except thou payèd were. No, no, thou never did’st me good,    nor ever wilt, I know. Yet am I in no angry mood,    but will, or ere I go, In perfect love and charity,    my testament here write, And leave to thee such treasury,    as I in it recite. Now stand aside and give me leave       to write my latest will; And see that none you do deceive    of that I leave them till.
~~~
There is a music to this sadness.
In a room somewhere two people dance.
I do not mean to say desire is everything.
A cup half empty is simply half a cup.
How many times have we been there and not there?
I have seen waitresses slip a night's
worth of tips into the jukebox, their eyes
saying yes to nothing in particular.
Desire is not the point.
Tonight your name is a small thing
falling through sadness. We wake alone
in houses of sticks, of straw, of wind.
How long have we stood at the end of the pier
watching that water going?
In the distance the lights curve along
Tampa Bay, a wishbone ready to snap
and the night riding on that half promise,
a half moon to light the whole damned sky.
This is the way things are with us.
Sometimes we love almost enough.
We say I can do this, I can do
more than this
~~~
No one wants another paean to a rosy dawn,
so it's good this one's bluish, baby-shade
at the horizon, bleeding up into midnight like
a botched dye job.
And having enough of the old world—larks,
crakes, nightingales, storks—this space
is populated by one fly crabbing
across a notebook page. He seems, like me,
honey-slowed by winter's shortest days, clumsy
and isolated. My love bought a black-and-white
photo once, close-up of a birch trunk,
fly crawling up
the curled paper bark, marring the purity
of the image. You don't notice the fly
until you do, and then you can't stop.
No one wants a fly in art,
but there it is, elegantly framed.
And we're over the epic, so here, first thing
this morning, a pedestrian quarrel. Years ago, I flew
across a mountain range in black coat
and black boots to secretly meet him
in the city. How many dawns did it take to arrive
at this particular? At 9:30 the sky flares
not like flame—a paper fan
you buy in Chinatown for a dollar.
A sudden breeze sways the Tibetan flags strung along
the eaves. I never noticed how thin
the fabric. You can see right through the printed prayers
to the thermometer—
five degrees—and beyond, birches leaning
all to windward. Sun bleaches out
the last mysterious. Now we pray to the real.
                                                             —11.29.2012
~~~
This is how it is with me:
so strong, I want to draw the egg
from your womb and nourish it in my own.
I want to mother your child made only
of us, of me, you: no borrowed seed
from any man. I want to re-fashion
the matrix of creation, make a human being
from the human love that passes between
our bodies. Sweetheart, this is how it is:
when you emerge from the bedroom
in a clean cotton shirt, sleeves pushed back
over forearms, scented with cologne
from an amber bottle—I want to open
my heart, the brightest aching slit
of my soul, receive your pearl.
I watch your hands, wait for the sign
that means you’ll touch me,
open me, fill me; wait for that moment
when your desire leaps inside me.
~~~
... if thou shouldst not be glad,
I would divorce me from thy mother’s tomb,
Sepulch’ring an adult’ress.
— William Shakespeare, King Lear



He faked my death,
set up this ranch
far from my three
daughters. Suburban
hellhole. With bracelet
on ankle, house-
arrest. At noon
the bully sun
shoulders a ripe
moon. In the dark
soaps reign. The anchors
will often flash
their glitterati
weddings. Not one
daughter has birthed
an heir. In vitro —
be damned. I hose
the lawn and count
the cars like fish
slipping their shiny
chrome along asphalt.
Which sparrow missed?
Cordelia —
my gutted heart.
~~~
Falling in love with a mustache
is like saying
you can fall in love with
the way a man polishes his shoes
                which,
                of course,
                is one of the things that turns on
                my tuned-up engine
                those trim buckled boots
                (I feel like an advertisement
                for men’s fashions
                when I think of your ankles)
Yeats was hung up with a girl’s beautiful face
and I find myself
a bad moralist,
a failing aesthetician,
a sad poet,
wanting to touch your arms and feel the muscles
that make a man’s body have so much substance,
that makes a woman
lean and yearn in that direction
that makes her melt/ she is a rainy day
in your presence
the pool of wax under a burning candle
the foam from a waterfall
You are more beautiful than any Harley-Davidson
She is the rain,
waits in it for you,
finds blood spotting her legs
from the long ride.
~~~
When we talk about when to tell the kids,we are so together, so concentrated.I mutter, “I feel like a killer.” “I’mthe killer”—taking my wrist—he says,holding it. He is sitting on the couch, the old indigo chintz around him, rich as a night sea with jellies, I am sitting on the floor. I look up at him,as if within some chamber of matedness,some dust I carry around me. Tonight,to breathe its Magellanic field is lesspainful, maybe because he is drinkinga wine grown where I was born—fog,eucalyptus, sempervirens—and I’msharing the glass with him. “Don’t catchmy cold,” he says, “—oh that’s right, you wantto catch my cold.” I should not have told him that,I tell him I will try to fall out of love with him, but I feel I will love himall my life. He says he loves meas the mother of our children, and new troupesof tears mount to the acrobat platformsof my ducts and do their burning leaps.Some of them jump straight sideways, and, for amoment, I imagine a flurryof tears like a whirra of knives thrownat a figure, to outline it—a heart’s spurt of rage. It glitters, in my vision, I nodto it, it is my hope.
~~~
It seems I have always sat here watching men like you — 
who turn heads, whose gaze is always either a kiss
or a slap or the whiplash of pure disregard. Why fret? All
you’re doing is walking. You’re this year’s It, the
one righteous integer of cool cruising down a great-lipped
channel of hushed adoration, women turned girls
again, brightening in spite of themselves. That
brave, wilting smile — you don’t see it, do you?
How she tells herself to move on; blinks until she can.
~~~
I might have married a painter,
Therefore his mother. A radar
Detector, a snow-covered
Mountain, a novel
By John Grisham not even
Out yet. No, I wed
The cop directing my rush,Toot toot, a trainer to test
Agility, a kettle calling
Time to steep. Yes,
But I married this bird you must
Close your eyes to know
At scale, to hear his trills
And fancy arpeggios
Come-come-hithering.
His note of warning.
~~~
Today is a Tuesday, one of many.
He has a girl he loves every Tuesday,
her day off. He burns
at the fine fire of her conscience,
tells her they’ll be married
someday. He has a wife,
Doreen, a freckle-faced fat thing
who harbors resentment that during her Tuesday
at her mother’s, he insists on going to the movies.
Rose petals he picks up in the neighbor’s yard
end up at Tuesday’s feet and
sprinkled through the sheets.
Of course they must make love,
since he sees her only once a week.
Doreen requires sex after seeing her mother.
He feels like an ox on Tuesday, powerful and massive.
He tells this to Tuesday
and to Doreen.
Doreen tells him he is an ox
a brute master of the air and his rightful bed.
But Tuesday, who knows oxen
are slow moving, dim witted,
and castrated at birth,
follows him home instead of playing her dulcimer,
climbs the wall, watches him mounting his wife,
leaves rose petals on his doorstep,
takes the train to cornfields, steers and heifers
watches the city disappear in rain.
Thinks briefly of how tenderly
he rose in her fingers
while the remains of their breakfast,
eggs and potatoes
cooled on the wooden table
with the tattered tablecloth.
~~~
The shirt touches his neck
and smooths over his back.
It slides down his sides.
It even goes down below his belt—
down into his pants.
Lucky shirt.
~~~
Instead of a cup of tea, instead of a milk-
silk whelk of a cup, of a cup of nearly six
o'clock teatime, cup of a stumbling block,
cup of an afternoon unredeemed by talk,
cup of a cut brown loaf, of a slice, a lack
of butter, blueberry jam that's almost black,
instead of tannin seeping into the cracks
of a pot, the void of an hour seeps out, infects
the slit of a cut I haven't the wit to fix
with a surgeon's needle threaded with fine-gauge silk
as a key would thread the cylinder of a lock.
But no key threads the cylinder of a lock.
Late afternoon light, transitory, licks
the place of the absent cup with its rough tongue, flicks
itself out beneath the wheel's revolving spoke.
Taut thought's gone, with a blink of attention, slack,
a vision of "death and distance in the mix"
(she lost her words and how did she get them back
when the corridor of a day was a lurching deck?
The dream-life logic encodes in nervous tics
she translated to a syntax which connects
intense and unfashionable politics
with morning coffee, Hudson sunsets, sex;
then the short-circuit of the final stroke,
the end toward which all lines looped out, then broke).
What a gaze out the window interjects:
on the southeast corner, a black Lab balks,
tugged as the light clicks green toward a late-day walk
by a plump brown girl in a purple anorak.
The Bronx-bound local comes rumbling up the tracks
out of the tunnel, over west Harlem blocks
whose windows gleam on the animal warmth of bricks
rouged by the fluvial light of six o'clock.
~~~
When this day returns to meI will value your heart, long hurt in long division,over mine. Mouth above mine too —say you love me, truth never moremeant, say you are angry.Words, words we net with our mouths.Soul is an old thirst but not as firstas the body’s perhaps,though on bad nights its melancholyeats us out, to a person.True, time is undigressing.Yet true is all we can be:rhyming you, rhyming me.
~~~
Last night, when the moon
slipped into my attic room
as an oblong of light,
I sensed she’d come to commiserate.
It was August. She traveled
with a small valise
of darkness, and the first few stars
returning to the northern sky,
and my room, it seemed,
had missed her. She pretended
an interest in the bookcase
while other objects
stirred, as in a rock pool,
with unexpected life:
strings of beads in their green bowl gleamed,
the paper-crowded desk;
the books, too, appeared inclined
to open and confess.
Being sure the moon
harbored some intention,
I waited; watched for an age
her cool gaze shift
first toward a flower sketch
pinned on the far wall
then glide down to recline
along the pinewood floor,
before I’d had enough. Moon,
I said, We’re both scarred now. Are they quite beyond you,
the simple words of love? Say them.
You are not my mother;
with my mother, I waited unto death.
~~~
The rain whistled.
 
A taxi brought me to your apartment building
And there I stood.
 
I had dreamed a dream
Of us in a bedroom.
The light shining upon us in white sheets.
 
You were singing me a song of your sailing days
And in the dream
I reached deep in you and pulled out a cardinal
Which in bright red
Flew out the window.
 
Sometimes when we talk
On the phone, I think to myself
That the deep perfect of your soul
Is what draws me to you.
But still what soul is perfect?
All souls are misshapen and off-colored.
Morning comes within a soul
And makes it obey another law
In which all souls are snowflakes.
 
Once at a funeral, a man had died
And with the prayers said, his soul flew up in a hurry
Like it had been let out of something awful.
It was strangely colored, that soul.
And it was a funny shape and a funny temperature.
As it blew away, all of us looking felt the cold.
~~~
—at Dubai International Airport and ending with a line by César Vallejo



Because I must walk
            through the eye-shaped
shadows cast by these
            curved gold leaves thick
atop each constructed
            palm tree, past displays
of silk scarves, lit
            silhouettes of blue-bottled
perfume—because
            I grip, as though for the first
time, a paper bag
            of french fries from McDonald's,
and lick, from each fingertip,
            the fat and salt as I stand alone
to the side of this moving
            walkway gliding me past dark-
eyed men who do not look
            away when I stare squarely
back—because standing
            in line to the restroom I want
only to pluck from her
            black sweater this one shimmering
blond hair clinging fast—
            because I must rest the Coke, cold
in my hand, beside this
            toilet seat warmed by her thighs,
her thighs, and hers.
            Here, at the narrow mouth
of this long, humid
            corridor leading to the plane,
I take my place among
            this damp, dark horde of men
and women who look like me—
            because I look like them—
because I am ashamed
            of their bodies that reek so
unabashedly of body—
            because I can—because I am
an American, a star
            
~~~
I.   
Only now, in spring, can the place be named:   
tulip poplar, daffodil, crab apple,   
dogwood, budding pink-green, white-green, yellow   
on my knowing.   All winter I was lost.   
Fall, I found myself here, with no texture   
my fingers know.   Then, worse, the white longing   
that downed us deep three months.   No flower heat.   
That was winter.   But now, in spring, the buds   
flock our trees.   Ten million exquisite buds,   
tiny and loud, flaring their petalled wings,   
bellowing from ashen branches vibrant   
keys, the chords of spring’s triumph: fisted heart,   
dogwood; grail, poplar; wine spray, crab apple.   
The song is drink, is color.   Come.   Now.   Taste.
II.   
The song is drink, is color.   Come now, taste   
what the world has to offer.   When you eat   
you will know that music comes in guises—   
bold of crepe myrtle, sweet of daffodil—   
beyond sound, guises they never told you   
could be true.   And they aren’t.   Except they are   
so real now, this spring, you know them, taste them.   
Green as kale, the songs of spring, bright as wine,   
the music.   Faces of this season grin   
with clobbering wantonness—see the smiles   
open on each branch?—until you, too, smile.   
Wide carnival of color, carnival   
of scent.   We’re all lurching down streets, drunk now   
from the poplar’s grail.   Wine spray: crab apple.
III.   
From the poplar’s grail, wine spray.   Crab apple   
brightens jealously to compete.   But by   
the crab apple’s deep stain, the tulip tree   
learns modesty.   Only blush, poplar learns,   
lightly.   Never burn such a dark-hued fire   
to the core.   Tulip poplar wants herself   
light under leaf, never, like crab apple,   
heavy under tart fruit.   Never laden.   
So the poplar pours just a hint of wine   
in her cup, while the crab apple, wild one,   
acts as if her body were a fountain.   
She would pour wine onto you, just let her.   
Shameless, she plants herself, and delivers,   
down anyone’s street, bright invitations.
IV.   
Down anyone’s street-bright invitations.   
Suck ‘em.   Swallow ‘em.   Eat them whole.   That’s right,   
be greedy about it.   The brightness calls   
and you follow because you want to taste,   
because you want to be welcomed inside   
the code of that color: red for thirst; green   
for hunger; pink, a kiss; and white, stain me   
now.   Soil me with touching.   Is that right?   
No?   That’s not, you say, what you meant.   Not what   
you meant at all?   Pardon.   Excuse me, please.   
Your hand was reaching, tugging at this shirt   
of flowers and I thought, I guess I thought   
you were hungry for something beautiful.   
Come now.   The brightness here might fill you up.
V.   
Come.   Now the brightness here might fill you up,   
but tomorrow?   Who can know what the next   
day will bring.   It is like that, here, in spring.   
Four days ago, the dogwood was a fist   
in protest.   Now look.   Even she unfurls   
to the pleasure of the season.   Don’t be   
ashamed of yourself.   Don’t be.    This happens   
to us all.   We have thrown back the blanket.   
We’re naked and we’ve grown to love ourselves.   
I tell you, do not be ashamed.   Who is   
more wanton than the dancing crepe myrtle?   
Is she ashamed?   Why, even the dogwood,   
that righteous tree of God’s, is full of lust   
exploding into brightness every spring.
VI.   
Exploding into brightness every spring,   
I draw you close.   I wonder, do you know   
how long I’ve wanted to be here?   Each year   
you grasp me, lift me, carry me inside.   
Glee is the body of the daffodil   
reaching tubed fingers through the day, feeling   
her own trumpeted passion choiring air   
with hot, colored song.   This is a texture   
I love.   This is life.   And, too, you love me,   
inhale my whole being every spring.   Gone   
winter, heavy clod whose icy body   
fell into my bed.   I must leave you, but   
I’ll wait through heat, fall, freeze to hear you cry:   
Daffodils are up.   My God, what beauty!
VII.   
Daffodils are up, my God!   What beauty   
concerted down on us last night.   And if   
I sleep again, I’ll wake to a louder   
blossoming, the symphony smashing down   
hothouse walls, and into the world: music.   
Something like the birds’ return, each morning’s   
crescendo rising toward its brightest pitch,   
colors unfurling, petals alluring.   
The song, the color, the rising ecstasy   
of spring.   My God.   This beauty.   This, this   
is what I’ve hoped for.   All my life is here   
in the unnamed core—dogwood, daffodil,   
tulip poplar, crab apple, crepe myrtle—   
only now, in spring, can the place be named.
~~~
The tuba wakes before the man. It’s a content animal:
having no word, for the moment, suits it fine.
 
It looks at him with a dun and smooth
interiority, as a glass of rum might,
 
or a worn number on an apartment building:
his hands, crossed on the chest, rise and fall with breathing.
 
In the dream, he’s ringing the bell now; climbing,
unlocking the door, peering into a glass.
 
The flat is empty. Is the war over yet? Or
was he here before the war? Soon, dropping salt levels
 
will wake him—
 
in tears, with an odd groove in his palm, as though
he’d held on to an instrument for hours.
 
For a good minute, he’ll be nameless, and when
a name does come, it won’t be his:
 
humming in thought the bright last name
he rang on the doorbell, he’ll see, in a certain
 
abrupt sunlight: he’d chosen
her, then—
to be able to call everything something.
~~~
But keep writing.
Write by the glow of the windows,
the roof alight
like a red-haired girl,
you in the back yard, safe.
 
The ladybug's flown away.
Recall her flit and armored crawl.
To the last breath of summer.
Upon the circular of winter.
 
The man may have left.
This doesn't stop
the writing. Between
the pages, a slight blur.
The man may have been old
and ill, or young
who stopped trying
to be with you.
Ghost days.
 
You're swimming across
a deep lake with a soul
you're making.
You save the swimmer,
the sailor,
the drowned,
the damned
and the beloved.
~~~
The herons were no longer safe in the sky. They flew with prayer,
then fell to us. We hid them from the cats. What to do with prayer?
Decades after the civil war, we enter the sniper’s hole, sew
the sandbags, read words for his boyfriend on the wall, true with prayer.
Write my name & invite me to a wedding. I want a parade
of cars with flashers on, each blinking red, two times two with prayer.
Dear Eurydice, what good a heart that can’t resist looking back?
Foolish, music-laden Orpheus. Almost saved you with prayer.
In the museum of memory, the missing accumulate.
They shoot out of the tiles like grass blades, damp & new with prayer.
I found a photo in a library book: lovers holding hands.
I felt chosen, then lost it. & I didn’t pursue with prayer.
When I interviewed God, I said I moved the plants toward the light,
forgot the water. Is love a lack, always imbued with prayer?
Tarot cards, make me beautiful. Abundance me, O Three of Cups,
spin luck O Wheel of Fortune, I’m through, I’m through, I’m through with prayer.
~~~
Mossy and thumping, bare of logic, red:             why do they say your other head                          and not your other heart? The snack cakes of Smut Wonderlandturn Alice smaller than her dress. She stirs,nude in the folds of so much baby blue.              To think, they called this lesser art.I ate mostly orders then, and you—you were thinking with your other heart. I took in a dog the way some might take in             a dress (I had become just skin).                          It coughed. I cried for itto stop, I fed it meat, its maladyrecurrent and untreatable. I had to give it up, like some bum body part              whose incidental benefitthe human form has out-evolved. Don’t start.That dog: I called it Help, and I cried for it.
~~~
We rise from the snow where we’ve
lain on our backs and flown like children,
from the imprint of perfect wings and cold gowns,   
and we stagger together wine-breathed into town   
where our people are building
their armies again, short years after
body bags, after burnings. There is a man
I’ve come to love after thirty, and we have   
our rituals of coffee, of airports, regret.   
After love we smoke and sleep
with magazines, two shot glasses
and the black and white collapse of hours.   
In what time do we live that it is too late   
to have children? In what place
that we consider the various ways to leave?   
There is no list long enough
for a selective service card shriveling   
under a match, the prison that comes of it,   
a flag in the wind eaten from its pole   
and boys sent back in trash bags.
We’ll tell you. You were at that time   
learning fractions. We’ll tell you
about fractions. Half of us are dead or quiet   
or lost. Let them speak for themselves.
We lie down in the fields and leave behind   
the corpses of angels.
~~~
Our oneness is the wrestlers’, fierce and close,
  Thrusting and thrust;One life in dual effort for one prize,—
  We fight, and must;For soul with soul does battle evermore
  Till love be trust.Our distance is love’s severance; sense divides,
  Each is but each;Never the very hidden spirit of thee
  My life doth reach;Twain! Since love athwart the gulf that needs
  Kisses and speech.Ah! wrestle closelier! we draw nearer so
  Than any blissCan bring twain souls who would be whole and one,
  Too near to kiss:To be one thought, one voice before we die,—
  Wrestle for this.
~~~
We meet midway to walk white cobbles under a fish-flesh gray sky. Europe is collapsing; we are collapsingalways and again no matter how hardwe love one another. I don’t understand our failure, where the feed loops back and spits us into another country, another junior suite reenacting this same,same beat of   a scene that begins, rises,never ends, always ends —Our intentions don’t meet, their courses set differently by a force you don’t believe in,could be as simple as life. I want to be the wife you don’t want. You won’t let go of my wrist. I resist, threaten, bully, acquiesce. We write the next act of The Alchemistin New York, Lisbon, a beach, a bar, star-crossed maybe from different galaxies. You approach, I retreat. You retreat, I reproach.The manic two-step jitters over North Africa’s dunes farther than our hero, Santiago, can see. I rise in the night to find the sharp knifethat came with the pears as a courtesy.
~~~
“I have heard (but not believed) the spirits of the dead
May walk again.”
Winter’s Tale



If spirits walk, Love, when the night climbs slow
The slant footpath where we were wont to go,
      Be sure that I shall take the self-same way
      To the hill-crest, and shoreward, down the gray,
Sheer, gravelled slope, where vetches straggling grow.
Look for me not when gusts of winter blow,
When at thy pane beat hands of sleet and snow;
   I would not come thy dear eyes to affray,
               If spirits walk.
But when, in June, the pines are whispering low,
And when their breath plays with thy bright hair so
      As some one's fingers once were used to play—
      That hour when birds leave song, and children pray,
Keep the old tryst, sweetheart, and thou shalt know
               If spirits walk.
~~~
There is a chair

the heart of which

is wooden

split five ways

and grass pressed flat

where we kissed

where others later kissed

on the same mattress

and solemn nothing

happening under a canopy—

 

Have you forgotten me?

 

I will go down wonderfully

as was told in proverbs

though for a long time I thought

I should not go.

 

Here are things that have

no Latin names

or none

that men would know.
~~~
As we sat at the feet of the string quartet,  in their living room, on a winter night,  through the hardwood floor spurts and gulps  and tips and shudders came up, and the candle-scent  air was thick-alive with pearwood,  ebony, spruce, poplar, and horse  howled, and cat skreeled, and then,  when the Grösse Fugue was around us, under us,  over us, in us, I felt I was hearing  the genes of my birth-family, pulled, keening  and grieving and scathing, along each other,  scraping and craving, I felt myself held in that  woods of hating longing, and I knew  and knew myself, and my parents, and their parents,  there—and then, at a distance, I sensed,  as if it were thirty years ago,  a being, far off yet, oblique-approaching,  straying toward, and then not toward,  and then toward this place, like a wandering dreaming  herdsman, my husband. And I almost wanted  to warn him away, to call out to him  to go back whence he came, into some calmer life,  but his beauty was too moving to me,  and I wanted too much to not be alone, in the  covert, any more, and so I prayed him  come to me, I bid him hasten, and good welcome.
~~~
He described her mouth as full of ashes.
So when he kissed her finally
he was thinking about ashes
and the blacker rim just below
the edge of the ashtray,
and the faint dark rim that outlined her lips,
and the lips themselves, at the limit
of another darkness, farther
and far more interior.
Then the way the red,
paling, just outside those lines
caught fire and the pages caught
soon after that. Slowly at first,
but then all at once
at the scalloped brown corners of each;
like the ruff of an offended and darkening bird,
extended, then folded
in on itself; multiple,
stiffening, gone.
~~~
The man who told me about warsaid, it's the only thingthat keeps us busy.I thought of your fingerson my backcounting the vertebraeone by one.The only thing?
~~~
One man prays: How shall I be able to lie with this woman?
      Do thou pray thus: How shall I not desire to lie with her?
      Another prays thus: How shall I be released from this?     
      Another prays: How shall I not desire to be released?
      —Marcus Aurelius




When we are lost in our longings, Aurelius, already it is too late:
there is already nothing we can do. I have rarely desired an end
to my desires. We are so in love with our wanting. Last week,
though doctors were quick to repair it, a baby in India was born
grasping her own beating heart in her fist. Today, a Dumpster
arrives from Dave’s Trash Removal & I begin to fill it. I toss in
a transistor radio that hasn’t worked in years. A man walking past
asks if he can take it. Later, he returns & carries off a broken TV.
A neighbor salvages the dented gray fuse box; a girl wants a window,
a paper bag full of tangled cords. All night I listen to the wind
& the echoes of feet kicking through rubbish, like a mouse nesting
inside a drum. My older brother is dead a decade. Yet here
in its enormous gold frame is the familiar, pastel portrait
someone named Maxwell drew for our mother, an inaccurate
rendering of the two of us when we were small. I can’t look at it;
I can’t throw it away. Every change is a death, you tell yourself,turn thy thoughts now to thy life as a child. . . . One day, I tell myself,
I will shut all the doors, leave everything behind. The museum
is showing a hundred tricked-out Victorian photographs
of that other world: the hoax of floating fairies, women haunted
by ghostly blurs. Another century & still we want to believe
in what we know cannot be true. Your words, Aurelius, have found me,
but you could not. If we are disappointed, we have only ourselves
to blame: Wipe out thy imagination. We fill our hands when they are
empty. We empty ourselves when we have held too much too long.
~~~
My heart is bleeding. It bleeds upward and fills
my mouth up with salt. It bleeds because of a city in ruins,
the chair still warm from sister's body,
because it will all be irreproducible. My heart
bleeds because of baby bear not finding mama bear and it bleeds
to the tips of my fingers like I painted my nails Crimson.
Sometimes my heart bleeds so much I am a raisin.
It bleeds until I am a quivering ragged clot, bleeds at the ending
with the heroine and her sunken cancer eyes, at the ending
with the plaintive flute over smoke-choked killing fields. I'm bleeding
a river of blood right now and it's wearing a culvert in me for the blood. My heart
rises up in me, becomes the cork of me and I choke on it. I am bleeding
for you and for me and for the tiny babies and the IED-blown
leg. It bleeds because I'm made that way, all filled up with blood,
my sloppy heart a sponge filled with blood to squeeze onto 
any circumstance. Because it is mine, it will always bleed.
My heart bled today. It bled onto the streets
and the steps of city hall. It bled in the pizza parlor with the useless jukebox.
I've got so much blood to give inside and outside of any milieu.
Even for a bad zoning decision, I'll bleed so much you'll be bleeding,
all of us bleeding in and out like it's breathing,
or kissing, and because it is righteous and terrible and red.
 
~~~
Once we played at love together—
  Played it smartly, if you please;Lightly, as a windblown feather,
  Did we stake a heart apiece.Oh, it was delicious fooling!
  In the hottest of the game,Without thought of future cooling,
  All too quickly burned Life’s flame.In this give-and-take of glances,
  Kisses sweet as honey dews,When we played with equal chances,
  Did you win, or did I lose?
~~~
If the nose of the pig in the market of Firenze has lost its matte patina, and shines, brassy,  even in the half light; if the mosaic saint on the tiles of the Basilica floor is half gone,  worn by the gravity of solid soles, the passing of piety; if the arms of Venus have reentered the rubble, taken by time, her perennial lover, mutilating even the memory of beauty;                                                                                                            and if the mother, hiding with her child from the death squads of brutality, if she, trying to keep the child quiet, to keep them from being found out,  holds her hand over his mouth, holds him  against her, tighter and tighter, until he stops breathing;                                if the restorer—trying to bring back to perfection the masterpiece scarred by its transit through time, wipes away by mistake, the mysterious smile. . .                                                                                                           if what  loves, and love is, takes away what it aims to preserve,                                   then here is the place to fall  silent, meaning well but in danger of marring what we would praise, unable to do more than wear down the marble  steps to the altar, smother the fire  we would keep from the wind’s extinction,                                                                                                           or if, afraid  of our fear, we lift the lid from the embers, and send  abroad, into the parched night, a flight of sparks, incendiary, dying to catch somewhere,  hungry for fuel, the past, its dry provision tinder for brilliance and heat, prelude to cold, and to ash. . .
~~~
If I leave all for thee, wilt thou exchange And be all to me? Shall I never miss Home-talk and blessing and the common kiss That comes to each in turn, nor count it strange, When I look up, to drop on a new range Of walls and floors ... another home than this? Nay, wilt thou fill that place by me which is Filled by dead eyes too tender to know change? That's hardest. If to conquer love, has tried, To conquer grief, tries more ... as all things prove; For grief indeed is love and grief beside. Alas, I have grieved so I am hard to love. Yet love me—wilt thou? Open thine heart wide, And fold within, the wet wings of thy dove.
~~~
Purveyor of  rot and whatnot, entrepreneur of  I forgot, with wrists hard as hammers — that birthmark a slot — grip it, strip it, flip it hard — ramp my shard.If  fear be sexy, a synch & a match — Gone the way of  wax & worms — gone like November 2011 — sweet by nature, mean by culture — “Goodbye, luck, you idiot,” said the Fox to the Grapes. “I love you,” replied the Grapes.
~~~
Vien dietro a me e lascia dir le genti. 
~~~
The dog came back, grinning and smelling of carrion, and her husband behind it, stride and gestures too large for the house. His field voice, cracking, declared a wider kingdom, and the name of a fallen city, not theirs this time. From outside the roar and shrill of celebration poured in. He drew near in a rank cloud, breathing hard, to show her the gash in his thumb. So she washed in five waters and went to their bed, but he slept without moving, still in his cloak and dust.
~~~
What is the structure of lips
That take care of sounds,
That can scream loud and long,
That can wait and be silent?
Yesterday I was mastering words
And kissing lips lightly—
Their loving weakness
Now remains on my own
Hardworking lips,
Exacting, as if forever,
My terrible punishment.
~~~
Tell me,
Was Venus more beautiful
Than you are,
When she topped
The crinkled waves,
Drifting shoreward
On her plaited shell?
Was Botticelli’s vision
Fairer than mine;
And were the painted rosebuds   
He tossed his lady
Of better worth
Than the words I blow about you
To cover your too great loveliness   
As with a gauze
Of misted silver?
For me,
You stand poised
In the blue and buoyant air,
Cinctured by bright winds,
Treading the sunlight.
And the waves which precede you   
Ripple and stir
The sands at my feet.
~~~
I am haunted by how much our mothers do not know.
How a republic falls because of its backhanded deals,
stairwell secrets. My mother does not know I am lying
with a man who is darker than me, that we do not
have names for how we truly treat our bodies.
What we do with them. The other possesses me.
Without him the perception of me fails to exist.
My mother now is taking her sheers and cutting
through live shrimp. When I was a child she peeled
each flushed grape until only the pale fleshy bead
remained. She placed them onto a plate in one shining
mound, deseeded, in front of me. How I sucked and bled
the fruit of all their juice, hypnotized in front of the buzz
of television in each version of my childhood. I am
her daughter. This is certain. I am lying down with a man
who is darker than me and maybe this poem is my
real republic, my face is my face, or is it stolen from
my mother and hung over mine? If I were a dream
you could say my countenance was a string of flickering lights
made of teeth or an expression unraveling like a carpet
into a narrow river of another life. Does truth matter
when it's floating face up or face down?
The answer to this makes all the difference.
~~~
I want to write a love poem for the girls I kissed in seventh grade,
a song for what we did on the floor in the basement
 
of somebody’s parents’ house, a hymn for what we didn’t say but thought:That feels good or I like that, when we learned how to open each other’s mouths
 
how to move our tongues to make somebody moan. We called it practicing, and
one was the boy, and we paired off—maybe six or eight girls—and turned out
 
the lights and kissed and kissed until we were stoned on kisses, and lifted our
nightgowns or let the straps drop, and, Now you be the boy:
 
concrete floor, sleeping bag or couch, playroom, game room, train room, laundry.
Linda’s basement was like a boat with booths and portholes
 
instead of windows. Gloria’s father had a bar downstairs with stools that spun,
plush carpeting. We kissed each other’s throats.
 
We sucked each other’s breasts, and we left marks, and never spoke of it upstairs
outdoors, in daylight, not once. We did it, and it was
 
practicing, and slept, sprawled so our legs still locked or crossed, a hand still lost
in someone’s hair . . . and we grew up and hardly mentioned who
 
the first kiss really was—a girl like us, still sticky with moisturizer we’d
shared in the bathroom. I want to write a song
 
for that thick silence in the dark, and the first pure thrill of unreluctant desire,
just before we’d made ourselves stop.
~~~
When I take my scissors to your shirts,
I am frightened: not that they will whimper
But that they won’t understand the violence I mean.
That kind of violence is the other side of love,
Bright as a light-saber and permanent
As the angel’s swords above Eden
Barring that couple with a final X,
That violence means a love strong as death.
Once Sie ist mein leben, you said, meaning me
And I took those words personally
And knocked upon the door of my heart
Until all its birds flooded to you, in a rush—
Like the Iroquois, I tugged on our peace-pipe,
I wrote your name in smoke. Then went home
With my pockets rolling in shining glass beads,
My pockets so rich with the coin of your country.
 
~~~
The eye’s desire for relief.
I’m the tiger lily bobbing in the heat.
And also the neighbor, shaved bald and
lifting weights on the balcony. Each petal
is the receipt of a shameful dream—
a thought we hadn’t wanted to incorporate
lolling from my parted mouth.
But you know it’s mistakes that make life happen.
A cardboard suitcase of beer for the traveler.
And if we get too close to the words
on this page they soften and warp
into an animal lace, some net
whose logic won’t reveal itself. I pull our eyes
back because I love you. But then you draw them
back further still because that sounds like an excuse.
The whiny version of Love Hurts loops and curls
like ribbon through a scissor, being pulled
across the blade. The money in this poem’s
easy, if you don’t mind having no thoughts and
sitting in one place, while your body changes shape.
 
~~~
He crawls through the cracks
of my stone foundation,
 
sly and sleek as
I tempt him with food.
 
He stays out of habit; I cook
out of love for things that move.
 
We grow accustomed to each other’s
trails and smells, the skins we’ve shed
 
along the long, long road
of rubbing each other smooth.
 
Till all the skins we’ve shed lie sparkling
like so many stones in this desert land.
 
I scoop him up in my hand
and eat him.
~~~
Let it come down: these thicknesses of airhave long enough walled love away from love;stillness has hardened until words despairof their high leaps and kisses shut themselvesback into wishing. Crippled lovers lieagainst a weather which holds out on them,waiting, awaiting some shrill sign, some cry,some screaming cat that smells a sacrificeand spells them thunder. Start the mumbling lips,syllable by monotonous syllable,that wash away the sullen griefs of loveand drown out knowledge of an ancient war—o, ill-willed dark, give with the sound of rain,let love be brought to ignorance again.Originally appeared in the March 1964 issue of Poetry magazine.
~~~
Sweetheart, for such a day
     One mustn’t grudge the score;
Here, then, it’s all to pay,
     It’s Good-night at the door.
 
Good-night and good dreams to you,—
     Do you remember the picture-book thieves
Who left two children sleeping in a wood the long night through,
     And how the birds came down and covered them with leaves?
 
So you and I should have slept,—But now,
     Oh, what a lonely head!
With just the shadow of a waving bough
     In the moonlight over your bed.
~~~
Some people say the devil is beating
his wife. Some people say the devil
is pawing his wife. Some people say
the devil is doubling down on an overall
attitude of entitlement toward
the body of his wife. Some people
say the devil won’t need to be sorry,
as the devil believes that nothing
comes after this life. Some people say
that in spite of the devil’s public,
long-standing, and meticulously
logged disdain for the health
and wholeness of his wife, the devil
spends all day, every day, insisting
grandly and gleefully on his general
pro-woman ethos, that the devil truly
considers himself to be an unswayed
crusader: effortlessly magnetic,
scrupulous, gracious, and, in spite of
the devil’s several advanced degrees,
a luminous autodidact. Some people
say calm down; this is commonplace.
Some people say calm down;
this is very rare. Some people say
the sun is washing her face. Some
people say in Hell, they’re having a fair.
~~~
The aftermath always happening like an airplane falling, or a man
midair falling from a horse, and an arrow, a gun, many guns
pointing away, at us, our all bull’s-eye-on-the-mark. This is what he
sees when he sees. Maybe Wrong or not, the appropriation, the film
clip, chase, pressed lips over lips, photo moment on the minute-drawn
breath in, the over, the under, bodies in black and white cut to pose,
the way a kiss can pose, dispose of everything around it for another,
dispose of thinking. It’s like waving good-bye. Mouth to mouth seeing
as saying. Inside. Resuscitation back to the brain saying yes as the mouth
makes an O. Circles for the digital age, colored dots for faces already
made for erasing. Hurry, come, he, 6’7”, sees fifteen minutes from the
Mexican border, cremates his old paintings up close. But the ashes were
kept in a book urn, not so afloat in the ocean with my parents, Above,
On, and Under (with Mermaid)
~~~
One must be brave to live through
a day. What remains
is nothing but the pleasure of longing—very precious.
Longing
purifies as does flying, strengthens as does an effort,
it fashions the soul
as work
fashions the belly.
It is like an athlete, like a runner
who will never
stop running. And this
gives him endurance.
Longing
is nourishing for the strong.
It is like a window
on a high tower, through which
blows the wind of strength.
Longing,
Virginity of happiness.
~~~
Little Box talks back
With a new set of teeth
And pink gums
A fake nose and a wax mustache
She disguises her voice
To sound like Groucho
 
 • 
Little Box opens up
And cries to her psychiatristI don’t know why they hate me
I’m such a sweetheart
I volunteer at the zoo
And teach Mandarin
To their bratty children
~~~
I.
When his dogs leapt on Actaeon, he   
cried (did he cry out?)—He flung
his arm to command, they tore his hand   
from the wrist stump, tore
guts from his belly through the tunic, ripped   
the cry from his throat.
That’s how we know a god, when the facts   
leap at the tenderest innards, and we know
the god is what we can’t change. You
stood over me as I woke, I opened my eyes, I saw
that I’d seen and that it was too   
late: the seeing
of you in the doorway with weak electric light
fanning behind you in the hall, and my room and narrow pallet steeped in shadow
were what I couldn’t change, and distantly   
I wanted you, and, as distantly,
I heard the dogs, baying.
    II.
And yet the fountain spends itself, and it is   
in the clear
light of its losing that we seem   
to take delight:
you dipped your hand in its running braid   
to sprinkle my forehead, my lips.
Garden deities observed us: three nymphs
with moss staining their haunches, a pug-nosed faun.
The wound in water closed
perfectly around your gesture, erasing it,
so that only the glimmer, swiftly   
drying, on my face recalled
our interruption
of the faultless, cold, passionate, perpetual
idea of the stream’s descent—
which, unlike ours, would always be renewed.
    III.
I kissed a flame, what did I expect.
Those days, you painted in fire. Tangerine, gold:   
one would have had to be a pilgrim to walk   
through that wall of molten glass.
And purification
could be conceived, if not   
attained, only after many years,
in autumn, in a fire greater than yours,
though menstrual blood still tinged the threshold
and our ex-votos were sordid—scraps of blistered flesh
taped to kitsch prayer cards—and neither of us knew   
the object of this exercise, except   
having, inadvertently, each of us, burned
we recognized the smell
of wood smoke, the slow swirl
flakes of wood ash make in heavy air;
and we were ready, each in a private way, to make   
the gifts the season required.   
Mine was the scene
of my young self in your arms,
eyes in your eyes, clutched in the effort
to give each other away—when I glimpsed
behind your pleasure, fear; behind   
fear, anger; and knew   
in a bolt some gifts
conceal a greater gift.
I have kept it. Now I am ready to give it back   
into darker flame
in this season of goldenrod, the ardent weed,   
and Queen Anne’s lace in its mantilla of ash.   
And yet, how lumpishly, how stupidly I stand.
How much that is human will never burn.
    IV.
And if you should answer?
I listened, years before I knew you, to the whine
of wind through the high stony pastures above my childhood village;
I breathed lavender and thyme and burned my bare legs   
on nettles, scraped them on thistles, and rubbed   
the sore skin till it reddened all the more. When we
walked the uplands together, you burned your hand
and I kissed the crimsoning nettle-rash. “We are the Lords of need,”
you said Hafiz said,
and I believed you, and we were.
In the rugs of your country, carmine is crushed   
from insects, cochineal; saffron gold
is boiled from crocus stamens; and indigo
of heaven and fountain pools is soaked, hours upon hours,   
from indigo leaves. “Like the angel Harut,”
you said, “We are in the calamity of love-desire.”
The angel is chained by neck and knees, head down, in the pit of Babel
for falling in love. Your carpets
told a different story: scarlet and saffron   
blush as in Paradise, and God reveals himself
in wine, flame, tulips, and the light in a mortal eye.
All night you held me, sleepless, on my childhood cot in the stone house;
all night the wind seethed through crags and twisted olive trees,   
high on the scents of thyme and goat droppings. “All night,”
Hafiz sang, “I hope the breeze of dawn will cherish the lovers.”   
But the breeze of dawn is the angel of death.   
You are in your far landscape now, I am in mine:
the wind complains and I can’t understand the words.   
And if you should answer?   
You, ten years away, in a different wind.
“We are in the calamity,” Hafiz sang. “But tell the tale   
of the minstrel and of wine, and leave time alone. Time   
is a mystery no skill will solve.” We should
thread words like pearls, you said, and the grateful sky   
would scatter the Pleiades upon us   
though we couldn’t see, and that was long ago.
    V.
The carpet is not a story. It is a place,   
garden of crisscrossed pathways, labyrinth,   
fountain, pool, and stream.
As though the fabric had ripped at the vanishing point   
at the top of the street
of ashen façades and slate-sloped roofs, you stepped
through the gap, out of your own world.   
I had already lost my world.   
We met in a torn design
which we tore further, pulling the tall warp,
thread wrapped tightly around our fingers until it bit the flesh   
and the rue de Lille unravelled.
I know about design: it’s my job,
arranging other people’s letters in star charts
that phosphoresce in the dark between the closed covers of books.
You knew about design from the holes   
blown through your country.
We spoke in a language of no country on earth.
You moved slowly, in shadow, teaching the shadows   
to echo my name. You ripped my shirt at the neck.   
Was it The Beloved I held, holding you?
Down the middle of the carpet the river
weaves a thousand gray glimmers into the deeper green.   
The river knows about mourning; that’s its job.
How many years has it practiced? With such fleet fingers. A man   
woke me at dawn this morning, sobbing and cursing in the street,   
reeling from sidewalk to gutter and back again.
On my long gray street, the rue de Lille, where I still live.
~~~
    
 
i came close to his WET dog’s eye & a FAT tear shared animal PAIN sloshed & seeped in between us — “darling I’m sorry you were born a dog & people notice it” , 
2 COME ON IN, WE’VE BEEN EXPECTING YOU
like a clue
we found PEOPLE
in the KITCHEN
in the SUICIDE VEST
with the KALASHNIKOV
such beautiful, desperate weapons
their faces
had to be covered
so we didn’t fall in love
piteously
with the self-same wretchedness
we see in mirrors
a worryingly familiar scene
we’ve lived in will live in
the carnage
going on
behind closed doors
being told, regurgitatingly, “you only get one shot!”
but is it true
you only get one shot
when you get a loaded magazine
& plenty more
where that came from
in the MUNITIONS DEPOT
which I picture in Arizona, right
beside a render farm
and to the left
THE CLOUD
that backs up
and up and up
up
to where
are there edges, Bobby?
INTELLIGENCE tells us
to test the power of names
by naming things, for one thing
to name is to guarantee the end
like a starting pistol
BANG
            you name
                            it         it’s
                         !
                 smithereens
4
I am so indifferent
to the limits
of feelings
I can’t tell the difference
every time someone lifts my flap
the unwashed salad
the unheated leftovers
the sanitary products are standard
but bear no relation
to what I expected
to feel overlaid
with various forms of filth
don’t you sometimes feel
like getting wrapped in a dog towel
and buried in the hardening ground
under the Canadian maple? Do dogs
need to approach death
and back away from it
like I did when the vet injected
deep pentobarbital & his bowels
ejected across the floor tiles
I was there
to inhale his fur and weep
for my benefit
I am not independent
of my feelings this way
of talking about feelings
has fooled each one of us
                             I’d rather be given CBT
                             by a border collie
when there are fewer words around
my arms around
his only
adored and stinking
neck 
dead
up my nostrils
throw me in there with him everything is in the cold awful and I’m not OK and without good reason still here and
 
 
 
 
 
 
feelings
 
 
 
6 JUST A GENTLE REMINDER
A LOT OF WORK
goes into making sex alluring sex
is just this and that
but it seemed, for a moment, that a new
climax had been won when
even the sky fingered me
with a slobbery insistence when
we were retching with so much desire
we created a whole new atmosphere
grabbing at sex things /
using the sick bag to be actually sick in
now the shower curtain is transparent
it’s a way of saying, “I want you too
to have this experience
so that we are more alike
like a sign that life struck once
in a slippy-bits marathon
that began when our eyes were magnets
yanked to each other’s fully-charged
crotches at a picnic
when it was essential
to make every enhancement
to our ‘connection’ by getting seriously indecent
beside the Bluetooth wireless speaker system
until even the trees had to dash inside
to pour ice in their underpants”
while I choked up playing the scene, as we lived it,
united by our pursuit of arrhythmia or
satisfying itches to that
catchy bridge section in Chopin
(I couldn’t wait to come
with Chopin through his melancholic meadow
(not that I approve of background music
(I prefer to foreground the piano
by massaging it loud and all over
until the top layer comes off in my hand
and the pedal squeaks for humanity
(I like to FEEL a piano as an instrument
of interruption and consciousness
(though I also like to take light swims, to get away
from what I FEEL (today I felt
jelly beans resemble kidneys))))))
which throbs like everyone grieving
 
 
 
 
 
7 HERE, HAVE A NEW PUPPY
said the Russians to the French
to soften the dog-loss
but mostly the dog’s image the image
is the greater likeness
except we never seem to run out of images
sometimes something in an image
runs through me and that is very common
as is reading about something
that’s happening to someone outside of me
until I know someone outside of me
without any knowledge
it is a test for my knowledge
to hang around until morning
practically all mornings are news to me
practically all knowledge is news to me
practically all news is images
going very fast around the world
so we have to guzzle them
like wrapped food
— hot and on the run —
in one end and squitted out the other
[pics or it didn’t happen]
until I’m fat with implications
and containing not a sausage
 
9
I love a good weepy
dog-meme as much as the next crybaby
and nauseate irregularly
when the gifs load automatically
his hairy body
into my hairy body
unfairly the dog
becomes the shape of 2:13 p.m.
in me on a Tuesday
if we accept the world as totally fucked
there’s a lot worse coming
than dog hairs in macaroni cheese dog hairs on pillows dog hairs in rented flats in bathtubs in my hair in my dog’s hair in your short & curlies between my teeth in coagulant soap bars
some people are revolted
by dogs and dogs
are not up for revolting
I am revolted
when dogs are lacking
what if he did lick my cheeks
by which I mean “buttocks”
which were coated in whipped shea butter and
heavily comestible
it’s obvious he’s related to a father
he never knew
because we found all his needs
and perverted them
into a kind of inter-species loyalty
or the usual master-slave hierarchy
before laying down the crisp breakfast bowl
of the rest of his days
which gave us carte blanche to rush in anytime
and smother him with kisses
without getting socked in the eye
(unlike when I tried the same on Johnny (who spat my tongue out
      (& no one blamed him)))
when maybe all he wants is
just to go on
being less and less
subtle and alive
the way life becomes
very well known after its termination
 
 
12
If rigor mortis sets in
it means there’s somebody who needs it.
It means that somebody
is drained and not awake
and deems any speckles of life unusable
and he is dead and dead
all dead in the humus
of trashed bodies shoved down there
dressed in made-up relationships.
What’s your favorite part?
Mine’s every part
with a maggot in it. Maggots
mean that life’s still leaking.
It’s like magic
when his dead voice
is nauseating
and I can’t see him
so he might as well be invisible.
It’s like magic when he isn’t
and doesn’t have anything to say
and I can’t bear to listen anyway
so I just recognize my fingers / all
the injuries they’ve inflicted
while my skin drops off.
What’s worse than a maggot
in the EAT ME
GLOVE-BOX DATES?
Does the 5-second rule apply
to something that drops dead?
Is it true he might come back
and crack open a piñata
blue alcopops, bombay mix, karaoke, and a pint of nostalgia
which is like thinking in another language,
I mean, how it feels, not what it means.
Half a maggot, the memory of
mange marching across his fur
describes a lot of other feelings
the feeling that someone else is taking up the whole room
the feeling that no one could help me now
or ever whether I was on several edges
my hot core and noggin facing this hammering world
of brainlessness and sweetbreads
was always a favorite word.
I don’t know what it tastes like but I know it’s terrible.
a:ldskjfa:lkdgjsa
meaning
I’m so overcharged
that all I can do is literally slam
my hands / head / breasts against the keyboard.
Wherever there are
corpses there are maggots.
If we dig him up will he be wearing a jacket?
LOOK OUT
for the milkier, gentler solaces
which for all we know                   for all we know
could be the wind
or Chopin’s noise (still hammering the background) —
who’s seen it? Only its aftermath
is visible what’s not visible
is the aftermath of my screaming
 
 
20
you can catch me on the
     FLOOR / DOG / SYRINGE
periphery of the dying
and dead scene
     FACE (FEMALE)
maybe my whole life
carting sensations to the center
mopping shit up with towels
     SKULL / COFFIN
(there are feelings for these things)
while public petting
     CAR / PLANE / ROCKET
bodies leak it’s no surprise what I give away
     ONE DROPLET
you can have when the vet twirls off to deal
with some bloody business in a kitchen
     KNIFE / GUN
the hug-a-corpse scene gets deep in
the hold of what I am
     PARTY POPPER / WASTEBIN
is what I’ve not yet been
 
 
30
Who concocts the smell
of dogs which smells like
an extreme close-up
of the world oozing
in at the edges.
Full as an ice cube is full of liquid.
I mistook it for solidity.
The world is too full of smells.
Though it’s impossible
to see the top of it
they crawl between my legs
in the shimmering fuzz
on top of the plant
stickers of evenings
tongues held out
pocket-friendly air fresheners
strikes on our nostrils.
They come at me streaming.
Why the dog? Why not
the dog? Was it only a dream
of soil heating held
and stimulated
for his unique aroma.
It’s not a way in
but it places you somewhere
that smells strong
and looks strong leaving
behind us. Hi.
~~~
Like a bowerbird trailing a beakful of weeds   
Like prize ribbons for the very best
The lover, producer   
Of another’s pleasure
He whom her swollen lips await
Might wing through any day of the decade
A form of health insurance   
For which it is never too late
Titanic, silver brush
Hindenburg, of exploding cigars a climax
The watery below, the fiery above
Ashes of print between—pigment between
If the crippled woman were to descend   
From her bed, her fortress beyond midnight
Downstairs (nude/staircase) to the kitchen   
Naked to sit at the table (writing/thinking)
She might hear the washer spin like a full orchestra   
Complete a cycle like a train crash
Before the fiend would stare through the window   
Step smoothly into the kitchen, stop some clocks.
Envy shapes a fig tree in one’s breast,   
That is, bluntly to say, a cancer,
That is to say
In a mind, a fertile windy field. A murdered child.
Well then, fear, primarily of falling.   
Ebony surf toils on the beach, a glaze
At the same moment I am (from a cliff) falling   
The kitchen fiend removes his Dior tie
Places his hand over the woman’s   
And softly says: I am the lover.
Now if the crippled woman began to dance   
To pirouette, to rumba
Growling for her child
Her burning page, the devil would be shamed
(Materialism is not for everyone / Religion is   
The extension of politics by other means
~~~
In the next room, Peter’s gloved hands crack
cordoned-off spines: he has been granted
permission, his agent’s call his pedigree.
So the tour itself is only the docent and me.
He is docile, eager to please, leads me
up the stairs and takes me to the bed.The coverlet is authentic, he says.
He lectures me on the heating system, offers
an anecdote of a broken casserole, recites
all of the Welty lore he has rehearsed.
She taught him when he was young, and now
he serves her legend, lets me lean in
toward the books—I cross the line
of what’s allowed, never touching.
He shows me photos—two loves lost, one
a married man—then on the way down,
pauses before a feather in a box,
reciting Yeats’s “Leda and the Swan.”
He begins to weep at Let her drop, adds,Like Welty’s loves! Now I stop—
is he comparing her to the god, or Leda?
He cannot bear her, her Unfulfilled Love.
I cannot bear this either—how dare he conjure up
for her such disappointment, such wasted longing?
I want to be the mirror of her photographs,
to be her figure of my own conjuring. I want
to believe I, too, could be happy here, in this
solitary house, in this small town, amidst
the rows and stacks of books. Untouched.
~~~
By the river years ago, recursive in memory, a
finite moment, the past ended. Future began.
The river flowed south. You were a man’s face
floating among stones.
By a river in autumn, willow leaves were yellow
whisks in updrafts. We were not alone.
Cottonwood boles twisted against banks, turtles
dozed in the roots, bark slivered into water.
The river sounded the swish of its name. You
waded the Neosho as it meandered east.
Two sandhill cranes fly overhead. Their legs
stretch straight behind as they swim through air.
Their grace is the river’s.
No one saw flood-seined silt, gravel, broken
mussel pearls. I stayed, you left.
By the river I met you each day. I meet you each
day. I will be meeting you in invariant futures.
By the river leaves turn. Mud cracks pentagonal
shapes. You return and leave. The river remains.
By the river I was a child, I am grown. I remember
water pooled, not moving.
~~~
O patient shore, that canst not go to meetThy love, the restless sea, how comfortestThou all thy loneliness? Art thou at rest,When, loosing his strong arms from round thy feet,He turns away? Know’st thou, however sweetThat other shore may be, that to thy breastHe must return? And when in sterner testHe folds thee to a heart which does not beat,Wraps thee in ice, and gives no smile, no kiss,To break long wintry days, still dost thou missNaught from thy trust? Still, wait, unfaltering,The higher, warmer waves which leap in spring?O sweet, wise shore, to be so satisfied!O heart, learn from the shore! Love has a tide!
~~~
The dark is thrown Back from the brightness, like hair Cast over a shoulder. I am alone, Four years older; Like the chairs and the walls Which I once watched brighten With you beside me. I was to waken Never like this, whatever came or was taken. The stalk grows, the year beats on the wind. Apples come, and the month for their fall. The bark spreads, the roots tighten. Though today be the last Or tomorrow all, You will not mind. That I may not remember Does not matter. I shall not be with you again. What we knew, even now Must scatter And be ruined, and blow Like dust in the rain. You have been dead a long season And have less than desire Who were lover with lover; And I have life—that old reason To wait for what comes, To leave what is over. 
~~~
I laze about, deranged and unafraid
to godly kiss you, kiss the pharmacist
that whipped you, undilute, to dilate high
your animus of lime and lye.
I know of an upstairs hell.
A creamy, vascular thump
through bonus years of things that pass
and things that do not move. 
Your cellular mouth. Your mess
of inattention. Now that none 
of us are good looking I think
that/they are right.
Strokes of light you taped across my nipple.
Patterns staked to fake the love
we cannot feel so slick the miser
of your hand through my bad heart.
Genius, you are blond enough.
Once in a while.
And in the end, when I sweep coolly up
and will not be drawn back,
then I will tell you of it. How I can.
In writing, I am making an attempt
to depict my beautiful nose
through imagery.
I will tell you of it. Once in a while.
I will miss you. And the tape.
To be flung down,
petals from a balcony.
~~~
From behind, standing, from a distance, in passing, the taxi meter running, I'd watch her, I'd watch her hair, and what would I see? My stubborn theatre, curtain won't fall, my always-open theatre . . . Best to leave as soon as the show begins.
~~~
In reality my lovesare the strange box of a Polish dollThe blonde’s eyes appearingfixed to her hips long after midnightthe garret always singular to loosena massive mane across her back, its strandsthick and fine drapingher otter-like chinDeliberately she’d peer out from the wall and nothing could be seen but the shadow of  her breastshidden beneath marmots of  hairAnd lovely was her skin’s radianceat that unusual hourHer waist’s digressionseasily discernedas bees through grassthe window neither open nor closedWhat I saw, yellow like crystal,rose from sleepy thighsamassed in unseemly tourniquetsEverything before me, a pale shimmerof  hairs fanning delicatelyto reveal the pink or green skin I no longer knowof  hips a million centimetersfrom my gaze.
~~~
I know him, that man
walking- toward me up the crowded street
of the city, I have lived with him
seven years now, I know his fast stride,
his windy wheatfield hair, his hands thrust   
deep in his jacket pockets, hands
that have known my body, touched
its softest part, caused its quick shudders   
and slow releasings, I have seen his face   
above my face, his mouth smiling, moaning   
his eyes closed and opened, I have studied
his eyes, the brown turning gold at the centers,   
I have silently watched him lying beside me   
in the early morning, I know his loneliness,   
like mine, human and sad,
but different, too, his private pain
and pleasure I can never enter even as he comes   
closer, past trees and cars, trash and flowers,   
steam rising from the manhole covers,   
gutters running with rain, he lifts his head,   
he sees me, we are strangers again,   
and a rending music of desire and loss—
I don’t know him—courses through me,
and we kiss and say, It’s good to see you,
as if we haven’t seen each other in years   
when it was just a few hours ago,
and we are shy, then, not knowing   
what to say next.
~~~
Love
Is an interruption or an aberration, a force in opposition to the ultimate inertia
of the universe, 
Wrote Marguerite Duras. 
Whether or not it is worth it it occurs. Whether or not it is to be believed it is. 
The wind moves us without a frond being needed to be held by a slave girl. 
The rudiments of sentences are ancient without a mouth needing to remember
what it is losing as it lets those words out, something eviller than what they
even mean right now, something too evil to be known right now 
Or ever. 
I feel sure that even the most culpable people have other qualities secreted
away 
Adjusting their garments in light of fate 
He turned his head upward, he looked up the white wall. The light from the
lamp could be light coming from a great distance, it could be a great distance
away, and the wall could be snow it is so beautiful, he said. His head looking
up the wall, his eyes looking up it, he said, that nail in the wall could also be
beautiful, for so far away.
~~~
Oh, yes, the rain is sorry. Unfemale, of course, the rain is
with her painted face still plain and with such pixel you’d never see
it in the pure freckling, the lacquer of her. The world
is lighter with her recklessness, a handkerchief so wet it is clear.
To you. My withered place, this frumpy home (nearer
to the body than to evening) miserable beloved. I lie tender
and devout with insomnia, perfect on the center pillow past
midnight, sick with the thought of another year
of waking, solved and happy, it has never been this way! Believe
strangers who say the end is close for what could be closer?
You are my stranger and see how we have closed. On both ends.
Night wets me all night, blind, carried.
And watermarks. The plough of the rough on the slick,
love, a tendency toward fever. To break. To soil.
Would I dance with you? Both forever and rather die.
It would be like dying, yes. Yes I would.
I have loved the slaking of your forgetters, your indifferent
hands on my loosening. Through a thousand panes of glass
not all transparent, and the temperature.
I felt that. What you say is not less than that.
~~~
After Nadia Reid



This spirit she came upon me as I slept — in such a way
my life or yours could come to be so thoroughly owned — 
she was reckless — I knew she would make me run away
with her — I said spirit, slow down — but the spirit wanted
to ride — but I am so afraid, I said — I have all this tenderness
to impart — but the tenderness is not mine to give away — 
but all your tenderness is your own tenderness, said the spirit — 
it is not, I said — why then did you give it all away? — I did
not give it away — then it is yours to give away — the spirit
riddled like this — if in her arms I read a story — if out of her
arms I had the choice to write one but I chose not — chose not
because I did not know where I was going — because my path
broke down & I had this choice — stay or split — if I knew that
were I to split one part of me would become a ghost — if I did
not know yet which part — if the voice calling me out asked me
to describe the splitting & I did — if I said it was like smoke
spiraling outwards — it was like smoke lifting off me taking on
form & leaving me — if  it was like a delicate girl I never met
but dreamed of — if it was like the flags of my youth fluttering,
far out at sea — like breathing out a breath you will never take
back in — but you know you can never take any breath back in — 
if I saw her outside of myself & mourned her like I have mourned
no other loss — if I knew it was both a miracle & the most terrible
tragedy — to open up — release a flame — watch the flame go — 
have you seen it? A flame that can ride water — she was my
daughter & if I could I would send her to you, if I sent her to you
would you take her? Listen, I ran this out of me because I knew
it would burn me down — my trainers press the ground & lift up
again — I saw myself on my back in high grass in high summer
with everything coming to me — how this ghost left me & printed
a new person all over me — I could peel her off or live like this — 
I cried — one or both will destroy me! — the spirit called it fate but
I knew it was just drama — I will never know why a good person must die — 
fate does not exist I said, but every door I opened showed yesyes yes — I shut each one & locked it — checked the locks
three times — went back & checked them again — shook them to be
sure — drew hearts round the keyholes so the spirit would know
I loved her — it wasn’t — it was never — that I didn’t love her — 
~~~
Learning to love differently is hard,
love with the hands wide open, love
with the doors banging on their hinges,
the cupboard unlocked, the wind
roaring and whimpering in the rooms
rustling the sheets and snapping the blinds
that thwack like rubber bands
in an open palm.
It hurts to love wide open
stretching the muscles that feel
as if they are made of wet plaster,
then of blunt knives, then
of sharp knives.
It hurts to thwart the reflexes
of grab, of clutch ; to love and let
go again and again. It pesters to remember
the lover who is not in the bed,
to hold back what is owed to the work
that gutters like a candle in a cave
without air, to love consciously,
conscientiously, concretely, constructively.
I can’t do it, you say it’s killing
me, but you thrive, you glow
on the street like a neon raspberry,
You float and sail, a helium balloon
bright bachelor’s button blue and bobbing
on the cold and hot winds of our breath,
as we make and unmake in passionate
diastole and systole the rhythm
of our unbound bonding, to have
and not to hold, to love
with minimized malice, hunger
and anger moment by moment balanced.
~~~
They are a gift I have wanted again.
Wanted: One moment in mountains
when winter got so cold
the oil froze before it could burn.
I chopped ferns of hoarfrost from all the windows
and peered up at pines, a wedding cake
by a baker gone mad. Swirls by the thousand
shimmered above me until a cloud
lumbered over a ridge,
bringing the heavier white of more flurries.
I believed, I believed, I believed
it would last, that when you went out
to test the black ice or to dig out a Volkswagon
filled with rich women, you’d return
and we’d sputter like oil,
match after match, warm in the making.
Wisconsin’s flat farmland never approved:
I hid in cornfields far into October,
listening to music that whirled from my thumbprint.
When sunset played havoc with bright leaves of alders,
I never mentioned longing or fear.
I crouched like a good refugee in brown creeks
and forgot why Autumn is harder than Spring.
But snug on the western slope of that mountain
I’d accept every terror, break open seals
to release love’s headwaters to unhurried sunlight.
Weren’t we Big Hearts? Through some trick of silver
we held one another, believing each motion the real one,
ah, lover, why were dark sources bundled up
in our eyes? Each owned an agate,
marbled with anguish, a heart or its echo,
we hardly knew. Lips touching lips,
did that break my horizon
as much as those horses broke my belief?
You drove off and I walked the old road,
scolding the doubles that wanted so much.
The chestnut mare whinnied a cloud into scrub pine.
In a windless corner of a corral,
four horses fit like puzzle pieces.
Their dark eyes and lashes defined by the white.
The colt kicked his hind, loped from the fence.
The mares and a stallion galloped behind,
lifting and leaping, finding each other
in full accord with the earth and their bodies.
No harm ever touched them once they cut loose,
snorting at flurries falling again.
How little our chances for feeling ourselves.
They vanished so quickly—one flick of a tail.
Where do their mountains and moments begin?
I stood a long time in sharpening wind.
 
~~~
Beloved, my Beloved, when I think That thou wast in the world a year ago, What time I sate alone here in the snow And saw no footprint, heard the silence sink No moment at thy voice ... but, link by link, Went counting all my chains, as if that so They never could fall off at any blow Struck by thy possible hand ... why, thus I drink Of life's great cup of wonder! Wonderful, Never to feel thee thrill the day or night With personal act or speech,—nor ever cull Some prescience of thee with the blossoms white Thou sawest growing! Atheists are as dull, Who cannot guess God's presence out of sight.
~~~
Highlight Actions
Enable or disable annotations




The house was just twinkling in the moon light,   
And inside it twinkling with delight,
Is my baby bright.
Twinkling with delight in the house twinkling   
with the moonlight,
Bless my baby bless my baby bright,
Bless my baby twinkling with delight,
In the house twinkling in the moon light,
Her hubby dear loves to cheer when he thinks
and he always thinks when he knows and he always   
knows that his blessed baby wifey is all here and he
is all hers, and sticks to her like burrsburrs In the phrase “sticks to her like burrs,” these are prickly flower heads. One other definition of a burr is a circle of light about the moon or a star., blessed baby
~~~
Since there is no escape, since at the end
My body will be utterly destroyed,
This hand I love as I have loved a friend,
This body I tended, wept with and enjoyed;
Since there is no escape even for me
Who love life with a love too sharp to bear:
The scent of orchards in the rain, the sea
And hours alone too still and sure for prayer—
Since darkness waits for me, then all the more
Let me go down as waves sweep to the shore
In pride, and let me sing with my last breath;
In these few hours of light I lift my head;
Life is my lover—I shall leave the dead
If there is any way to baffle death.
~~~
Naked or not, I’m a costume that moves, figurine with a face that changes. You could call me a mood. I begin cheerful but sometimes turn solemn when confronted with my own mythology (wolf in a cape, cat scratch on a cupboard door, mouse tail in the hand of a bland farmer’s wife, a drop of blood on her shoe). Today’s beginning ended in a dream. In a fantastical bed, a lover leaned in to kiss me just as I realized I was part machine, part primitive urge. I left the bed and said, You know, don’t you, not everyone is so disposed. And then I heard from inside my head, You should say, not everyone is so disposed to your utopia. Only then did I realize I’d been inexact. Even here there are scolds that tell you how to be. Sometimes they live inside. Naked or not, I am trying to tuck my arms invisibly behind my back so that all you can see are my breasts and my highly simplified head.
~~~
After eighteen years there’s no real grief left   
for the man who was my father.
I hardly think of him anymore,
and those dreams I used to have,
in which he’d be standing in a room of people   
I didn’t know—maybe his new friends,   
if the dead have friendships—
those dreams no longer trouble my sleep.
He’s not in the crooked houses I wander through   
or in the field by the highway
where I’m running, chasing down
some important piece of paper,
desperate to reach it
as it’s lifted in the wake of trucks
or flattened and marked by passing cars,   
as it’s lifted again to swirl over
a broken wood fence. I don’t know why   
the paper’s so important, or if anything
is even written there.
I don’t know where the dead go,
or why it’s good to forget them,
not to see them if they come crowding
the windows or trying to lay themselves down   
and press along our bodies at night
and ask that we love them again,
that our sorrows include them once more.   
This morning I couldn’t get up.
I slept late, I dreamed of the single
sheet of paper, which I never managed to reach   
as it stuttered and soared over the grass
and a few flowers, so that I woke
with a sense of loss, wondering who
or what I had to mourn besides
my father, whom I no longer mourn,   
father buried in the earth beneath grass,   
beneath flowers I trample as I run.
~~~
I.
Here is a place where declarations
are made/where the heart takes precedence
the gleam goes bland
This is the heart part/intense improvisation
on the I/THOU axis
pity the poor actors (darlings)dust
in their throats (choking) dialogue ancient
(concentrated chatter dictated by clouds)
click of whispers
dammed up phrases     {mythologizing always)
Moans move through their limbs like wind through
Trees talking mad talk 'cross the illuminated
Avenues of hard cities.
II.
Take the skin
Take off the skin
Remove the vital organs one by one
especially the heart
What is left
The skeleton
The skeleton is made of calcium
magnesium, phosphorous et cetera:
an amazing catalogue of chemicals
You are holding in your arms
an amazing catalogue of chemicals
The elements clash tenderly
Sparking compounds that move like eels
Under touch.
III.
Dime falls, your voice rises (fevered)
It's keen, the way the wind whips this
Garbage up and around like a father
Swinging his baby we are holding hands
And yes, giggling no force can stop us now
We are singing all the James Brown songs
We know helpess off-key, but exhilarated
Columbus Avenue breakdown: how the puddles
In the sidewalks radiate splendor/glass
Broken against high-rise buildings beckon
We are hungry the shifting children salsa
And you may be our feast, please linger
You offer me your laughter
I take the sweat from y our cheeks and hum.
IV.
Taste like tears—sea flaked and heated—
Taste like try again and get nowhere,
Maybe, this is the sonnet that mimes itself
Sequences silent and perceptive
The "might have saids"
The stomach-eating rage
The power of conversation is in its
Possibilities of Interpretation
(here's where the mime becomes important
because the words sound so dumb)
And here's where the anxiety dance gets choreographed.
It goes like this: You turn clockwise.
I turn Counter-Clockwise. We stop, stumble
Resolve our steps. Begin again.
V.
You slipped into something dangerous
after attending to your intimate conferences
Thirsty friends forever requesting water
Or is it blood they want?            Your blood. 
Somebody's screaming. Is it me?
Here on the side street being a sideshow
For passersby. You put on your silver armor.
I have only my quaint devotion.
It is not enough.            You say
I can't eat your food, baby, but I sitll like your cooking.
Did I trip?         Did you?    That Mingus
record is still revolving. You smile
serenely.             I can barely breathe.
VI.
If I could waste myself, I'd do it here
In public. Curse your name till my tongue bled.
The same tongue that searched out the
darkest spot on your back and licked it like chocolate.
Curse your name like you were some
Broken god in need of further profaning.
But I am no good at playing: victim.
Sadness is so private. These tears on the
Uptown Express. Take that tired song off
the constant stereo. It keeps reminding me
That what brought me to you was music.
You said you never lied to me. Fucker.
You take the exit sign home with you.
But I won't become invisible.
~~~
For T.S.



Whose hands touched, first, the headof the penis, the shaft?And was it soft                          or shale?  More rockthan clay.And who pinched firstinto their place the small cups at the base of the ass?                                         Who was itgot down there, on whose knees,and blew—                         and was that passionor panic, the machine that drovethose exhalations?                                        —and howcould we rate the power of thatbreath—breeze or gale or a whisperlike the song the little boy singsto the beetle,                          whose small legs moved in tune like his legs, the legs on that first body, must havemoved, if they did move, when                                                        the dust settled.In my mind everything’s become enormous.But was it ever small like that, the first body?Did it ever sit close to the ants and their pilesof dirt from which that body had come?You were a small boy once, I suppose.You were dirty from the start.  You showed me how to use a cock ring,and why.                          How, without ever paying for a room, to spend two weeks in any city.How two men could fuck and continue to face each otherdirectly             —took my body and showed me,my back on a table, my knees by my head.  Stretched me                          into seeing you were more than a dog.You must be dead by now, though I don’t knowwhose hands prepared you.                                                       Whose fingersfingered, for the final time,all that dark and kinky hair?If the first body was made of dirt,in order to plumb the hollow of that first throat, whose thumb first lodged inside the hingeof that first mouth to force it open?To make the tongue, so it could work,who shoved inside that mouththe shit of a hundred thousand worms?
~~~
I have tried to say
that, although Love is not judgement
analysis too is a style
of affect
since the scale that rends me vulnerable
has cut, from abundance, doubt
(not that identity shunts
civic ratio or consequence) Sure —
I would prefer to respond to only
the established charms (and forget inconvenience)
but her hair was also a kind of honey
or instrument.
 
All that is beautiful, from which I choose
even artifice, which I hold above nature
won’t salve these stuttered accoutrements
~~~
Once again you’ve fallen for the lure of his deferral, his quick eyes’ brightness slinking from the pantry of the righteous. Nothing half so sleek as self-licked fur. Not that he forgot your boots, or left A single high-aimed compliment unturned. He’ll double back, affect to be concerned when he’s the secret reason you’re bereft, embracing you with his Houdini hold, repeating chewed-off bits of what you say so he seems loyal, you the turncoat jay. You’d think by now you’d learn to be consoled to know the soul he sold’s not yours but his, though where yours was a hollow feeling is.
~~~
As P strolled the path around the pond, he sniffed the humid air. His kimono brushed the parched ground. The metals of the earth rose up in traces of dust and hints of lightning: a waft of petrichor, the smell before the rain.

Beyond the pale hills of his peaceful land, scores of horse soldiers prepared their armor. Soon the soldiers would sweep across the plains, and the dry politics of princely maneuverings would be as rice paper soaked with blood. Instead of petty policies — immensity. Peaceful farmers would be impaled, paltry officials imprisoned — twisted, screaming, then praying. There on the dusty path the young poet P was just perceiving the beforeness of it all, the pre-.

From his masters he had learned that immensity makes the small crucial. A little poem before a big war becomes a necessity.

And like a small poem on a long scroll, a lily pad appeared on the pond. P stopped to peer. He puzzled through its pattern of green inside green on water.

A poem began to perfuse. It was inside P, but it was also on the lily pad.


At    ...    On    ...    At first only prepositions came to him.

He stared into the water, seeing the silvery clouds reflected. Then he leaned at an extreme angle and noticed the pattern of his gown wavering in the reeds. A pinpoint of a poem stabbed him, like the sharp scent of earth before the rain. Petrichor: before, before.
•
Then drops pelted the pond, pipped at the pond, plunged toward it, plummeted into it, driving P to take refuge beneath the deep tiled eaves of his house.

Inside the sliding paper doors were a desk and a futon. On the desk lay a brush. On the futon lay a lover in uneasy sleep on petal-printed silk.

He chose the desk. He lifted the brush while looking down at the restive slumberer. In a mere matter of stopped time he had his poem, written from the very tissues of an arm and hand that could plunge a sword.
Silver soldiers masson far horizons, but here,silk pools on the bed.
The rain rained; moisture curled the edges of the paper. Seventeen syllables, an epic of energy, made him drowsy and hungry. His lover still asleep, he rose, ate leftover peaches poached in soy sauce and ginger, and, with the rain a drizzle, thought again of his poem. How could he have loved it in the instant after he wrote it, but now be so unsure?

He sat at his desk again. Another one? This time he drafted:
Poppy? Penis up.Prow into periwinkle.Peony behind.
After he calligraphed the puzzle of passion across the page, he woke the one in the pond of pink silk, and they proved it on the futon. He heard the pluvial patter on the eaves, while they angled and slipped, perspiring on silk. The stamping and snorting of the horses sweating in their armor was far too far away to be sensed by P, but he heard. He felt the pond muddied and the roof cracked and the poems scattered. How far was he now from this picture in his mind? He worked to make his pleasure stay, pitiable and small against the portents rising, for P was afraid this afternoon would never be remembered after the bloody conquering.

But later the barbarians would bivouac in this house, the pond saved for drinking water, the path roughened by horses, and the  reverse of P’s scroll used for another man’s military diary, his afternoon’s foreboding and pleasure a preparation for the future, and in the future, a stay against another’s view of the past.

“P from Alphabetique,” 2013 by Kara Kosaka
~~~
Think not this paper comes with vain pretenseTo move your pity, or to mourn th’ offense.Too well I know that hard obdurate heart;No softening mercy there will take my part,Nor can a woman’s arguments prevail,When even your patron’s wise example fails.But this last privilege I still retain;Th’ oppressed and injured always may complain.
  Too, too severely laws of honor bindThe weak submissive sex of womankind.If sighs have gained or force compelled our hand,Deceived by art, or urged by stern command,Whatever motive binds the fatal tie,The judging world expects our constancy.
  Just heaven! (for sure in heaven does justice reign,Though tricks below that sacred name profane)To you appealing I submit my cause.Nor fear a judgment from impartial laws.All bargains but conditional are made;The purchase void, the creditor unpaid;Defrauded servants are from service free;A wounded slave regains his liberty.For wives ill used no remedy remains,To daily racks condemned, and to eternal chains.
  From whence is this unjust distinction grown?Are we not formed with passions like your own?Nature with equal fire our souls endued,Our minds as haughty, and as warm our blood;O’er the wide world your pleasures you pursue,The change is justified by something new;But we must sigh in silence—and be true.Our sex’s weakness you expose and blame(Of every prattling fop the common theme),Yet from this weakness you suppose is dueSublimer virtue than your Cato knew.Had heaven designed us trials so severe,It would have formed our tempers then to bear.
  And I have borne (oh what have I not borne!)The pang of jealousy, the insults of scorn.Wearied at length, I from your sight remove,And place my future hopes in secret love.In the gay bloom of glowing youth retired,I quit the woman’s joy to be admired,With that small pension your hard heart allows,Renounce your fortune, and release your vows.To custom (though unjust) so much is due;I hide my frailty from the public view.My conscience clear, yet sensible of shame,My life I hazard, to preserve my fame.And I prefer this low inglorious stateTo vile dependence on the thing I hate—But you pursue me to this last retreat.Dragged into light, my tender crime is shownAnd every circumstance of fondness known.Beneath the shelter of the law you stand,And urge my ruin with a cruel hand,While to my fault thus rigidly severe,Tamely submissive to the man you fear.
  This wretched outcast, this abandoned wife,Has yet this joy to sweeten shameful life:By your mean conduct, infamously loose,You are at once my accuser and excuse.Let me be damned by the censorious prude(Stupidly dull, or spiritually lewd),My hapless case will surely pity findFrom every just and reasonable mind.When to the final sentence I submit,The lips condemn me, but their souls aquit.
  No more my husband, to your pleasures go,The sweets of your recovered freedom know.Go: court the brittle friendship of the great,Smile at his board, or at his levee wait;And when dismissed, to madam’s toilet fly,More than her chambermaids, or glasses, lie,Tell her how young she looks, how heavenly fair,Admire the lilies and the roses there.Your high ambition may be gratified,Some cousin of her own be made your bride,And you the father of a glorious raceEndowed with Ch——l’s strength and Low——r’s face.
~~~
He called her:  golden dawn
She called him:  the wind whistles
He called her:  heart of the sky
She called him:  message bringer
He called her:  mother of pearl
           barley woman, rice provider,
           millet basket, corn maid,
           flax princess, all-maker, weef
She called him:  fawn, roebuck,
           stag, courage, thunderman,
           all-in-green, mountain strider
           keeper of forests, my-love-rides
He called her:  the tree is
She called him:  bird dancing
He called her:  who stands,
           has stood, will always stand
She called him:  arriver
He called her:  the heart and the womb
           are similar
She called him:  arrow in my heart.
~~~
“The experience of truth is indispensible
for the experience of beauty and the sense
of beauty is guided by a leap in the dark.”
Arthur Koestler



I.
Stoplights edged the licorice street with ribbon,
neon embroidering wet sidewalks. She turned
into the driveway and leaped in the dark. A blackbird
perched on the bouncing twig of a maple, heard
her whisper, “Stranger, lover, the lost days are over.
While I walk from car to door, something inward opens
like four o’clocks in rain. Earth, cold from autumn,
pulls me. I can’t breathe the same
with dirt for marrow and mist for skin,
blurring my vision, my vision’s separate self.
I stand drunk in this glitter, under the sky’s grey shelter.
The city maple, not half so bitter, hurls itself
in two directions, until both tips darken and disappear,
as I darken my reflection in the smoking mirror
of my home. How faint the sound of dry leaves,
like the clattering keys of another morning, another world.”
                                       II.
She looked out the window at some inward greying door.
The maple held her glance, made ground fog from her cigarette.
Beyond uneven stairs, children screamed,
gunned each other down. Then she sealed her nimble dreams
with water from a murky bay. “For him I map
this galaxy of dust that turns without an answer.
When it rains, I remember his face in the corridor
of a past apartment and trace the anguish around his mouth,
his wrinkled forehead, unguarded eyes, the foreign fruit
of an intricate sadness. With the grace that remains,
I catch a glint around a door I cannot enter.
The clock echoes in dishtowels; I search love’s center
and bang pans against the rubble of my day, the lucid
grandeur of wet ground, the strangeness of a fatal sun
that makes us mark on the margin of our loss,
trust in the gossamer of touch, trust in the late-plowed field.”
                                       III.
When the sun opened clouds and walked into her mongrel soul,
she chopped celery into rocky remnants of the sea,
and heard fat sing up bread, a better dying.
The magnet in each seed of the green pepper kept her flying,
floating toward memories that throb like clustered stars:
the dark water laughter of ducks, a tangle of November oaks,
toward sudden music on a wheel of brilliant dust
where like a moon she must leap back and forth
from emptiness. “I remember the moon shimmering
loss and discovery along a water edge, and skirting
a slice of carrot, I welcome eternity in that sad eye of autumn.
Rare and real, I dance while vegetables sing in pairs.
I hug my death, my chorus of years, and search
and stretch and leap, for I will be apprentice to the blood
in spite of the mood of a world
that keeps rusting, rusting the wild throats of birds.”
                                       IV.
In lamplight she saw the smoke of another’s dream:
her daughter walk woods where snow weighs down pine,
her son cry on a bridge that ends in deep-rooted dark,
her man, stalled on a lonely road, realize his torque
was alcohol and hatred. “Hungry for silence, I listen
to wind, to the sound of water running down mountain,
my own raw breath. Between the sounds, a seaborn god
plays his reed in the caverns of my being.
I wear his amethyst, let go my dreams: Millars, Lacewings,
and Junebugs scatter, widen and batter the dark,
brightening this loud dust with the fever of their eyes.
Oh crazy itch that grabs us beyond loss
and lets us forgive, so that we can answer birds and deer,
lightning and rain, shadow and hurricane.
Truth waits in the creek, cutting the winter brown hills.
It sings with needles of ice, sings because of its scar.”
~~~
Highlight Actions
Enable or disable annotations




I started Early – Took my Dog –
And visited the Sea –
The Mermaids in the BasementBasement i.e., the bottom of the ocean
Came out to look at me –
And FrigatesFrigates fast and highly maneuverable warships of the 18th and 19th centuries, used to escort other larger ships, or to patrol the coast and blockade harbors – in the Upper Floor
Extended Hempen HandsHempen Hands strong, thick ropes made of hemp, used on ships –
Presuming Me to be a Mouse –
Aground – oponopon upon the Sands –
But no Man moved Me – till the Tide
Went past my simple Shoe –
And past my Apron – and my Belt
And past my BoddiceBoddice bodice; an upper part of a woman’s dress, or a rigid, laced corset worn underneath clothing, covering the upper part of a woman’s body – too –
And made as He would eat me up –
As wholly as a Dew
Opon a Dandelion's Sleeve –
And then – I started – too –
And He – He followed – close behind –
I felt His Silver Heel
Opon my Ancle – Then My Shoes
Would overflow with Pearl –
Until We met the Solid Town –
No One He seemed to know –
And bowing – with a Mighty look –
At me – The Sea withdrew –
 
~~~
There will be no edges, but curves.
Clean lines pointing only forward.
History, with its hard spine & dog-eared
Corners, will be replaced with nuance,
Just like the dinosaurs gave way
To mounds and mounds of ice.
Women will still be women, but
The distinction will be empty. Sex,
Having outlived every threat, will gratify
Only the mind, which is where it will exist.
For kicks, we'll dance for ourselves
Before mirrors studded with golden bulbs.
The oldest among us will recognize that glow—
But the word sun will have been re-assigned
To the Standard Uranium-Neutralizing device
Found in households and nursing homes.
And yes, we'll live to be much older, thanks
To popular consensus. Weightless, unhinged,
Eons from even our own moon, we'll drift
In the haze of space, which will be, once
And for all, scrutable and safe.
~~~
Chandelier too full of brilliance to be indolent.
            Your prisms enunciate the light
and don’t need rain to break it into rainbows.
Snow with six crutches in each crystal.
            Your livery your glitter, your purring
made visible. Only inanimate things can sparkle
without sweat. My spinet, the threat of music
            in its depths and miniature busts of men composers
carved of time on top. The hollow bench
held sheet music. Sing me
            Charm Gets In Your Eyes. I hear you best
when undistracted by your body. In headspace
technology, where flowers are living
            in glass globes, their fragrance vivisected.
Anything that blooms that long
will seem inanimate. Heaven. Grief
            like the sea. Keeps going. Over the same wrought
ground. The whole spent moan. Praise dies
in my throat or in the spooky rift
            between itself and its intended. Like a wish-
bone breaking. The little crutch inside
is not a toy. There is no night asylum.
            A restless bed, a haunt preserve,
a blanket rough as sailcloth. But sing me, was it kind
snow sometimes? With true divided lights and nothing
            flawed about it? If song goes wrong,
be dancerly. Dance me, at what point
does west turn to east as it spins?
            I’ve never understood. Perspective.
How charm gets to yes. Dance me Exile
and the Queendom, by request.
            It is a ferocious thing
to have your body as your instrument.
Glove over glove, let your dance express
            what I’ve been creeping like a vein of sweat
through a vastness of.
This tune with mountains tied inside
            and many silent letters
can be read as trackers scan the spaces
between toes and birders read the rustle
            left by birds. As any mammal
in its private purr hole knows,
the little crutch inside
            is not a crutch. More a sort of
steeple. Neither silver to be chased
nor gold to be beaten.
            You were==you are
more than ever like that too.
Noon upon noon,
            you customize this solitude
with spires
that want nothing from me
            and rise with no objective
as everything does when happy.
~~~
Farewell my dearer half, joy of my heart,Heaven only knows how loth I am to part:Whole Months but hours seem, when you are here,When absent, every Minute is a Year:Might I but always see thy charming Face,I’de live on Racks, and wish no easier place.But we must part, your Interest says we must;Fate, me no longer with such Treasure trust.I wou’d not tax you with Inconstancy,Yet Strephon, you are not so kind as I:No Interest, no nor Fate it self has pow’rTo tempt me from the Idol I adore:But since you needs will go, may Africk beKinder to you, than Europe is to me:May all you meet and every thing you viewGive you such Transport as I met in you.May no sad thoughts disturb your quiet mind,Except you’l think of her you left behind.
~~~
My head, my heart, mine Eyes, my life, nay more, My joy, my Magazine of earthly store, If two be one, as surely thou and I, How stayest thou there, whilst I at Ipswich lye? So many steps, head from the heart to sever If but a neck, soon should we be together: I like the earth this season, mourn in black, My Sun is gone so far in’s Zodiack, Whom whilst I ’joy’d, nor storms, nor frosts I felt, His warmth such frigid colds did cause to melt. My chilled limbs now nummed lye forlorn; Return, return sweet  Sol from Capricorn; In this dead time, alas, what can I more Then view those fruits which through thy heat I bore? Which sweet contentment yield me for a space, True living Pictures of their Fathers face. O strange effect! now thou art Southward gone, I weary grow, the tedious day so long; But when thou Northward to me shalt return, I wish my Sun may never set, but burn Within the Cancer of my glowing breast, The welcome house of him my dearest guest. Where ever, ever stay, and go not thence, Till natures sad decree shall call thee hence; Flesh of thy flesh, bone of thy bone, I here, thou there, yet both but one. 
~~~
I believe that witness is a magnitude of vulnerability.
That when I say love what I mean is not a feeling
nor promise of a feeling. I believe in attention.
My love for you is a monolith of try.
 
The woman I love pays an inordinate amount
of attention to large and small objects. She is not
described by anything. Because I could not mean anything else,
she knows exactly what I mean.
 
Once upon a time a line saw itself
clear to its end. I have seen the shape
of happiness. (y=mx+b)
I am holding it. It is your hand.
~~~
On nights when the moon seems impenetrable—
a locked porthole to space;
when the householder bars his windows   
and doors, and his dog lies until dawn,
one jeweled eye open; when the maiden sleeps   
with her rosy knees sealed tightly together,   
on such nights the safecracker sets to work.   
Axe . . . Chisel . . . Nitroglycerin . . .
Within the vault lie forty thousand   
tons of gold; the heaped up spoils   
of Ali Baba's cave; the secrets of the molecule.   
He sands his fingertips
to feel the subtle vibrations
of wheel lining up, just so, with wheel.   
His toolmarks are his fingerprints.   
And now a crack appears on the side   
of the egg, a single fault line,
and within: the golden yolk just waiting.
A kind of wind . . . a door flies open . . . a glitter   
of forsythia forced out of the branch.   
With smoothest fingertips you touch   
the locked cage of my ribs . . . just so.   
My knees fall open. And Cleopatra smiles,   
whose own Egyptians first invented the lock.
~~~
Johannes Brahms and                                 
        Clara Schumann



The modern biographers worry

“how far it went,” their tender friendship.

They wonder just what it means

when he writes he thinks of her constantly,

his guardian angel, beloved friend.

The modern biographers ask

the rude, irrelevant question

of our age, as if the event

of two bodies meshing together

establishes the degree of love,

forgetting how softly Eros walked

in the nineteenth-century, how a hand

held overlong or a gaze anchored

in someone’s eyes could unseat a heart,

and nuances of address not known

in our egalitarian language

could make the redolent air

tremble and shimmer with the heat

of possibility. Each time I hear

the Intermezzi, sad

and lavish in their tenderness,

I imagine the two of them

sitting in a garden

among late-blooming roses

and dark cascades of leaves,

letting the landscape speak for them,

leaving us nothing to overhear.
~~~
If my own voice falters, tell them hubris was my way of adoring you.
The hollow of the hulk of you, so feverish in life, cut open,
Reveals ten thousand rags of music in your thoracic cavity.
The hands are received bagged and examination reveals no injury.
Winter then, the body is cold to the touch, unplunderable,
                                 Kept in its drawer of old-world harrowing.
Teeth in fair repair. Will you be buried where; nowhere.
Your mouth a globe of gauze and glossolalia.
And opening, most delft of blue,
                                                                  Your heart was a mess—
A mob of hoofprints where the skittish colts first learned to stand,
Catching on to their agility, a shock of freedom, wild-maned.
The eyes have hazel irides and the conjunctivae are pale,
With hemorrhaging. One lung, smaller, congested with rose smoke.
The other, filled with a swarm of massive sentimentia.
                                                                   I adore you more. I know
The wingspan of your voice, whole gorgeous flock of harriers,
Cannot be taken down. You would like it now, this snow, this hour.
                                 Your visitation here tonight not altogether unexpected.
The night-laborers, immigrants all, assemble here, aching for to speaking,
                                                                                        Longing for to work.
~~~
Filled with old lovers, in the clutch of the chair,
you are a bloom of uncombed hair.
With a collection of roses, bowls of mashed petals,
I make a clear cup of sky.
Fold away clouds. Roll up blankets of blue.
I am a body of empty husks.
Indian corn is in your hair, the tassels,
the pollen, fertility.
Indelible ink is tattooing our lungs.
We speak smoke.
We exchange our lunacy for reverence.
Respect tornados.
Windy Woman. Four Winds.
We have extended the edge of expectation
by merely living.
You have tallied compulsion
into currency.
I am measured by the excitement
my lips stir.
I am the bin for castoffs and the weary.
I wear my veil.
I have no children,
but you have many.
You dream of heaven and they all run up to meet you.
~~~
You love a woman and you wonder where she goes all night in some tricked-
out taxicab, with her high heels and her corset and her big, fat mouth.
You love how she only wears her glasses with you, how thick
and cow-eyed she swears it’s only ever you she wants to see.
You love her, you want her very ugly. If she is lovely big, you want her
scrawny. If she is perfect lithe, you want her ballooned, a cosmonaut.
How not to love her, her bouillabaisse, her orangina. When you took her
to the doctor the doctor said, “Wow, look at that!” and you were proud,
you asshole, you love and that’s how you are in love. Any expert, observing
human bodies, can see how she’s exceptional, how she ruins us all.
But you really love this woman, how come no one can see this? Everyone must
become suddenly very clumsy at recognizing beauty if you are to keep her.
You don’t want to lose anything, at all, ever. You want her sex depilated, you
want everyone else not blind, but perhaps paralyzed, from the eyes down.
You wonder where she goes all night. If she leaves you, you will know
everything about love. If she’s leaving you now, you already know it.
~~~
I’m alone until I’m asleep, and there you are: naked,
you take my hand: Shhhh! We
 
tiptoe through a
black-blue meadow. To the pond behind the farmhouse. (The farmer
 
sleeps in the blind window.) No cicadas even,
maybe just maybe Venus — & this is before Wednesday, everything’s
                 alright, we
 
tiptoe ‘round the house as around a painful subject — & we’re at the pond!
And now it’s time. To use vague holy-man speech, like: I am
 
another face in your hand, the face of your eye — wing-surrogates, the wordbones —
 
it’s time for afternoon, them white-blank architectures.
No, veil. Nothing’s glistening. Christmas, Christmas. It’s time
 
for you to forgive me: I was forced to eat valises
that wouldn’t close by themselves —
 
that was just a dream, good morning:
 
regurgitate the stars and the soot
~~~
We watched her grow up.
She was the urgent chirper,
Fledgling flier.
And when spring rolled
Out its green
She’d grown
Into the most noticeable
Bird-girl.
Long-legged and just
The right amount of blush
Tipping her wings, crest
And tail, and
She knew it
In the bird parade.
We watched her strut.
She owned her stuff.
The males perked their armor, greased their wings,
And flew sky-loop missions
To show off
For her.
In the end
There was only one.
Isn’t that how it is for all of us?
There’s that one you circle back to — for home.
This morning
The young couple scavenges seeds
On the patio.
She is thickening with eggs.
Their minds are busy with sticks the perfect size, tufts of fluff
Like dandelion, and other pieces of soft.
He steps aside for her, so she can eat.
Then we watch him fill his beak
Walk tenderly to her and kiss her with seed.
The sacred world lifts up its head
To notice — 
We are double-, triple-blessed.
~~~
If I could be anyting
I would be a rich white girl
and I am almost halfway there
I straightened my hair before it rained
Now all I can do is pray
I don't mean that figuratively
I'm living in this logocentrism
Where did I get these Spanish thighs
I was crying in the food court
because I'm afraid
of the spiritual anorexia that I crave
I wrote out a prayer in reportorial style
like a good Protestant
Obsessed with achieving
the androgyny of my time
I cut when my boyfriend said
I had the figure
of an average Hispanic girl
so what was I so upset about
I decided to try liposuction at home
So much splendor is owed
to dysmorphia and a fucked perspective
like those Gothic spires poking the heavens
that someone just thought up like
can we tap this broomstick
on ethereal marble floors or what
can we really do
 
~~~
O my Lord,
the stars glitter
and the eyes of men are closed.
Kings have locked their doors
and each lover is alone with his love.
Here, I am alone with You.
~~~
Who is that creature   and who does he want?   Me, I trust. I do not   attempt to call out his   name for fear he will   tread on me. What do   you believe, he asks.   That we all want to be   alone, I reply, except when   we do not; that the world   was open to my sorrow   and ate most of it; that   today is a gift and I am   ready to receive you.
~~~
I'm used to the emperor's bitterness
I can't find the sweet place unless you make me
This face that is not my face I may
look made but when you touch me you make me
Make the oak say blossom The stripped say swell
The avenue pavement say river Make me
This shirt I can't take off The one
the nights without you gathered to make me
The new day The sweet place Tomorrow
whispering from tonight's last light Make me
Kissing you without authorization
If you want me to stop you'll have to make me
The ruined city Or is it a woman
interrupting your sleep to say Now To say Make me
~~~
Two shall be born the whole world wide apart, And speak in different tongues, and pay their debts In different kinds of coin; and give no heed Each to the other’s being. And know not That each might suit the other to a T, If they were but correctly introduced. And these, unconsciously, shall bend their steps, Escaping Spaniards and defying war, Unerringly toward the same trysting-place, Albeit they know it not. Until at last They enter the same door, and suddenly They meet. And ere they’ve seen each other’s face They fall into each other’s arms, upon The Broadway cable car – and this is Fate!
~~~
                                    I
You may have all things from me, save my breath,
The slight life in my throat will not give pause
For your love, nor your loss, nor any cause.
Shall I be made a panderer to death,
Dig the green ground for darkness underneath,
Let the dust serve me, covering all that was
With all that will be? Better, from time’s claws,
The hardened face under the subtle wreath.
 
Cooler than stones in wells, sweeter, more kind
Than hot, perfidious words, my breathing moves
Close to my plunging blood.    Be strong, and hang
Unriven mist over my breast and mind,
My breath! We shall forget the heart that loves,
Though in my body beat its blade, and its fang.
 
                                    II
I erred, when I thought loneliness the wide
Scent of mown grass over forsaken fields,
Or any shadow isolation yields.
Loneliness was the heart within your side.
Your thought, beyond my touch, was tilted air
Ringed with as many borders as the wind.
How could I judge you gentle or unkind
When all bright flying space was in your care?
 
Now that I leave you, I shall be made lonely
By simple empty days, never that chill
Resonant heart to strike between my arms
Again, as though distraught for distance,­–only
Levels of evening, now, behind a hill,
Or a late cock-crow from the darkening farms.
 
~~~
How do I love thee? Let me count the ways. I love thee to the depth and breadth and height My soul can reach, when feeling out of sight For the ends of being and ideal grace. I love thee to the level of every day’s Most quiet need, by sun and candle-light. I love thee freely, as men strive for right; I love thee purely, as they turn from praise. I love thee with the passion put to use In my old griefs, and with my childhood’s faith. I love thee with a love I seemed to lose With my lost saints. I love thee with the breath, Smiles, tears, of all my life; and, if God choose, I shall but love thee better after death.Poetry Out Loud Note: In the print anthology, this poem is titled simply "How do I love thee? Let me count the ways." The student may give either title during their recitation. 
~~~
Dirt on my chin and I wonder: am I alreadyin the ground? Like a toy turned real, I cannot shedthe sense that I have died. The German wordfor Heaven’s the sameas the German word for sky. On hearing a cruelprince was in danger, I prayed for him to thrive,not for his own sake, but for the concubines,sure to end up buriedalong. To my real face, a man once crowedi ruined you, and though he did, the joke’son him: he ruined me only for this world,and this world is not longfor itself. The Earth, that ever-lovingbut distrustful kin, keeps leaving us just a littlepocket money when it dies, never the land —
~~~
Little tapers leaning lighted diagonally
Stuck in coffin tables of the Café du Néant
Leaning to the breath of baited bodies
Like young poplars fringing the Loire
 
Eyes that are full of love
And eyes that are full of kohl
Projecting light across the fulsome ambiente
Trailing the rest of the animal behind them
Telling of tales without words
And lies of no consequence
One way or another
 
The young lovers hermetically buttoned up in black
To black cravat
To the blue powder edge dusting the yellow throat
What color could have been your bodies
When last you put them away
 
Nostalgic youth
Holding your mistress's pricked finger
In the indifferent flame of the taper
Synthetic symbol of LIFE
In this factitious chamber of DEATH
The woman
As usual
Is smiling as bravely
As it is given to her to be brave
 
While the brandy cherries
In winking glasses
Are decomposing
Harmoniously
With the flesh of spectators
And at a given spot
There is one
Who
Having the concentric lighting focussed precisely upon her
Prophetically blossoms in perfect putrefaction
Yet there are cabs outside the door.
 
~~~
A gardenlate spring, honeysuckle and lazy birdsheavy with the round scentof tuberoses and jungle gardenia.There is a manin boots that make his thighslook lethal   with a whipno spursmedieval sorrow in his eyesor around the mouth, maybe.He is dangerousin this place he hasthe fertility of steel.There is a woman
in a vine green habit   her
veins are purple, her blue
eyes. She is blonde
though sometimes brunette:
~~~
Because you’re gone, I take a book to bed:The Flame of Passion. Scabbard at his thigh,
Lord Henry gets the girl. You’d only buy
top Booklist picks. “The romance genre’s dead,”
you’d say when promises of I-thee-wed
lured me to bargain bins. I learned to lie
about my day, hoard Harlequins on the sly
while you were off at work, your office spread
with red-inked proofs. But now it makes me yawn
to read beyond the lovers’ wedding night.
I close The Flame, not even halfway through.
His sword grows dull while she goes on and on
about how lovers must stay true. I’d write
another ending, if I could, for you.
~~~
I
I can hear little clicks inside my dream.
Night drips its silver tap
down the back.
At 4 A.M. I wake. Thinking
of the man who
left in September.
His name was Law.
My face in the bathroom mirror
has white streaks down it.
I rinse the face and return to bed.
Tomorrow I am going to visit my mother.
SHE
She lives on a moor in the north.
She lives alone.
Spring opens like a blade there.
I travel all day on trains and bring a lot of books—
some for my mother, some for me
including The Collected Works Of Emily Brontë.
This is my favourite author.
Also my main fear, which I mean to confront.
Whenever I visit my mother
I feel I am turning into Emily Brontë,
my lonely life around me like a moor,
my ungainly body stumping over the mud flats with a look of transformation
that dies when I come in the kitchen door.
What meat is it, Emily, we need?
THREE
Three silent women at the kitchen table.
My mother’s kitchen is dark and small but out the window
there is the moor, paralyzed with ice.
It extends as far as the eye can see
over flat miles to a solid unlit white sky.
Mother and I are chewing lettuce carefully.
The kitchen wall clock emits a ragged low buzz that jumps
once a minute over the twelve.
I have Emily p. 216 propped open on the sugarbowl
but am covertly watching my mother.
A thousand questions hit my eyes from the inside.
My mother is studying her lettuce.
I turn to p. 217.
“In my flight through the kitchen I knocked over Hareton
who was hanging a litter of puppies
from a chairback in the doorway. . . .”
It is as if we have all been lowered into an atmosphere of glass.
Now and then a remark trails through the glass.
Taxes on the back lot. Not a good melon,
too early for melons.
Hairdresser in town found God, closes shop every Tuesday.
Mice in the teatowel drawer again.
Little pellets. Chew off
the corners of the napkins, if they knew
what paper napkins cost nowadays.
Rain tonight.
Rain tomorrow.
That volcano in the Philippines at it again. What’s her name
Anderson died no not Shirley
the opera singer. Negress.
Cancer.
Not eating your garnish, you don’t like pimento?
Out the window I can see dead leaves ticking over the flatland
and dregs of snow scarred by pine filth.
At the middle of the moor
where the ground goes down into a depression,
the ice has begun to unclench.
Black open water comes
curdling up like anger. My mother speaks suddenly.
That psychotherapy’s not doing you much good is it?
You aren’t getting over him.
My mother has a way of summing things up.
She never liked Law much
but she liked the idea of me having a man and getting on with life.
Well he’s a taker and you’re a giver I hope it works out,
was all she said after she met him.
Give and take were just words to me
at the time. I had not been in love before.
It was like a wheel rolling downhill.
But early this morning while mother slept
and I was downstairs reading the part in Wuthering Heights
where Heathcliff clings at the lattice in the storm sobbing
Come in! Come in! to the ghost of his heart’s darling,
I fell on my knees on the rug and sobbed too.
She knows how to hang puppies,
that Emily.
It isn’t like taking an aspirin you know, I answer feebly.
Dr. Haw says grief is a long process.
She frowns. What does it accomplish
all that raking up the past?
Oh—I spread my hands—
I prevail! I look her in the eye.
She grins. Yes you do.
WHACHER
Whacher,
Emily’s habitual spelling of this word,
has caused confusion.
For example
in the first line of the poem printed Tell me, whether, is it winter?
in the Shakespeare Head edition.
But whacher is what she wrote.
Whacher is what she was.
She whached God and humans and moor wind and open night.
She whached eyes, stars, inside, outside, actual weather.
She whached the bars of time, which broke.
She whached the poor core of the world,
wide open.
To be a whacher is not a choice.
There is nowhere to get away from it,
no ledge to climb up to—like a swimmer
who walks out of the water at sunset
shaking the drops off, it just flies open.
To be a whacher is not in itself sad or happy,
although she uses these words in her verse
as she uses the emotions of sexual union in her novel,
grazing with euphemism the work of whaching.
But it has no name.
It is transparent.
Sometimes she calls it Thou.
“Emily is in the parlour brushing the carpet,”
records Charlotte in 1828.
Unsociable even at home
and unable to meet the eyes of strangers when she ventured out,
Emily made her awkward way
across days and years whose bareness appalls her biographers.
This sad stunted life, says one.
Uninteresting, unremarkable, wracked by disappointment
and despair, says another.
She could have been a great navigator if she’d been male,
suggests a third. Meanwhile
Emily continued to brush into the carpet the question,
Why cast the world away.
For someone hooked up to Thou,
the world may have seemed a kind of half-finished sentence.
But in between the neighbour who recalls her
coming in from a walk on the moors
with her face “lit up by a divine light”
and the sister who tells us
Emily never made a friend in her life,
is a space where the little raw soul
slips through.
It goes skimming the deep keel like a storm petrel,
out of sight.
The little raw soul was caught by no one.
She didn’t have friends, children, sex, religion, marriage, success, a salary
or a fear of death. She worked
in total six months of her life (at a school in Halifax)
and died on the sofa at home at 2 P.M. on a winter afternoon
in her thirty-first year. She spent
most of the hours of her life brushing the carpet,
walking the moor
or whaching. She says
it gave her peace.
“All tight and right in which condition it is to be hoped we shall all be this   
    day 4 years,”
she wrote in her Diary Paper of 1837.
Yet her poetry from beginning to end is concerned with prisons,
vaults, cages, bars, curbs, bits, bolts, fetters,
locked windows, narrow frames, aching walls.
“Why all the fuss?” asks one critic.
“She wanted liberty. Well didn’t she have it?
A reasonably satisfactory homelife,
a most satisfactory dreamlife—why all this beating of wings?
What was this cage, invisible to us,
which she felt herself to be confined in?”
Well there are many ways of being held prisoner,
I am thinking as I stride over the moor.
As a rule after lunch mother has a nap
and I go out to walk.
The bare blue trees and bleached wooden sky of April
carve into me with knives of light.
Something inside it reminds me of childhood—
it is the light of the stalled time after lunch
when clocks tick
and hearts shut
and fathers leave to go back to work
and mothers stand at the kitchen sink pondering
something they never tell.
You remember too much,
my mother said to me recently.
Why hold onto all that? And I said,
Where can I put it down?
She shifted to a question about airports.
Crops of ice are changing to mud all around me
as I push on across the moor
warmed by drifts from the pale blue sun.
On the edge of the moor our pines
dip and coast in breezes
from somewhere else.
Perhaps the hardest thing about losing a lover is
to watch the year repeat its days.
It is as if I could dip my hand down
into time and scoop up
blue and green lozenges of April heat
a year ago in another country.
I can feel that other day running underneath this one
like an old videotape—here we go fast around the last corner
up the hill to his house, shadows
of limes and roses blowing in the car window
and music spraying from the radio and him
singing and touching my left hand to his lips.
Law lived in a high blue room from which he could see the sea.
Time in its transparent loops as it passes beneath me now
still carries the sound of the telephone in that room
and traffic far off and doves under the window
chuckling coolly and his voice saying,
You beauty. I can feel that beauty’s
heart beating inside mine as she presses into his arms in the high blue room—
No, I say aloud. I force my arms down
through air which is suddenly cold and heavy as water
and the videotape jerks to a halt
like a glass slide under a drop of blood.
I stop and turn and stand into the wind,
which now plunges towards me over the moor.
When Law left I felt so bad I thought I would die.
This is not uncommon.
I took up the practice of meditation.
Each morning I sat on the floor in front of my sofa
and chanted bits of old Latin prayers.De profundis clamavi ad te Domine.
Each morning a vision came to me.
Gradually I understood that these were naked glimpses of my soul.
I called them Nudes.
Nude #1. Woman alone on a hill.
She stands into the wind.
It is a hard wind slanting from the north.
Long flaps and shreds of flesh rip off the woman’s body and lift
and blow away on the wind, leaving
an exposed column of nerve and blood and muscle
calling mutely through lipless mouth.
It pains me to record this,
I am not a melodramatic person.
But soul is “hewn in a wild workshop”
as Charlotte Brontë says of Wuthering Heights.
Charlotte’s preface to Wuthering Heights is a publicist’s masterpiece.
Like someone carefully not looking at a scorpion
crouched on the arm of the sofa Charlotte
talks firmly and calmly
about the other furniture of Emily’s workshop—about
the inexorable spirit (“stronger than a man, simpler than a child”),
the cruel illness (“pain no words can render”),
the autonomous end (“she sank rapidly, she made haste to leave us”)
and about Emily’s total subjection
to a creative project she could neither understand nor control,
and for which she deserves no more praise nor blame
than if she had opened her mouth
“to breathe lightning.” The scorpion is inching down
the arm of the sofa while Charlotte
continues to speak helpfully about lightning
and other weather we may expect to experience
when we enter Emily’s electrical atmosphere.
It is “a horror of great darkness” that awaits us there
but Emily is not responsible. Emily was in the grip.
“Having formed these beings she did not know what she had done,”
says Charlotte (of Heathcliff and Earnshaw and Catherine).
Well there are many ways of being held prisoner.
The scorpion takes a light spring and lands on our left knee
as Charlotte concludes, “On herself she had no pity.”
Pitiless too are the Heights, which Emily called Wuthering
because of their “bracing ventilation”
and “a north wind over the edge.”
Whaching a north wind grind the moor
that surrounded her father’s house on every side,
formed of a kind of rock called millstone grit,
taught Emily all she knew about love and its necessities—
an angry education that shapes the way her characters
use one another. “My love for Heathcliff,” says Catherine,
“resembles the eternal rocks beneath
a source of little visible delight, but necessary.”
Necessary? I notice the sun has dimmed
and the afternoon air sharpening.
I turn and start to recross the moor towards home.
What are the imperatives
that hold people like Catherine and Heathcliff
together and apart, like pores blown into hot rock
and then stranded out of reach
of one another when it hardens? What kind of necessity is that?
The last time I saw Law was a black night in September.
Autumn had begun,
my knees were cold inside my clothes.
A chill fragment of moon rose.
He stood in my living room and spoke
without looking at me. Not enough spin on it,
he said of our five years of love.
Inside my chest I felt my heart snap into two pieces
which floated apart. By now I was so cold
it was like burning. I put out my hand
to touch his. He moved back.
I don’t want to be sexual with you, he said. Everything gets crazy.
But now he was looking at me.
Yes, I said as I began to remove my clothes.
Everything gets crazy. When nude
I turned my back because he likes the back.
He moved onto me.
Everything I know about love and its necessities
I learned in that one moment
when I found myself
thrusting my little burning red backside like a baboon
at a man who no longer cherished me.
There was no area of my mind
not appalled by this action, no part of my body
that could have done otherwise.
But to talk of mind and body begs the question.
Soul is the place,
stretched like a surface of millstone grit between body and mind,
where such necessity grinds itself out.
Soul is what I kept watch on all that night.
Law stayed with me.
We lay on top of the covers as if it weren’t really a night of sleep and time,
caressing and singing to one another in our made-up language
like the children we used to be.
That was a night that centred Heaven and Hell,
as Emily would say. We tried to fuck
but he remained limp, although happy. I came
again and again, each time accumulating lucidity,
until at last I was floating high up near the ceiling looking down
on the two souls clasped there on the bed
with their mortal boundaries
visible around them like lines on a map.
I saw the lines harden.
He left in the morning.
It is very cold
walking into the long scraped April wind.
At this time of year there is no sunset
just some movements inside the light and then a sinking away.
KITCHEN
Kitchen is quiet as a bone when I come in.
No sound from the rest of the house.
I wait a moment
then open the fridge.
Brilliant as a spaceship it exhales cold confusion.
My mother lives alone and eats little but her fridge is always crammed.
After extracting the yogurt container
from beneath a wily arrangement of leftover blocks of Christmas cake
wrapped in foil and prescription medicine bottles
I close the fridge door. Bluish dusk
fills the room like a sea slid back.
I lean against the sink.
White foods taste best to me
and I prefer to eat alone. I don’t know why.
Once I heard girls singing a May Day song that went:
                                 Violante in the pantry
                                 Gnawing at a mutton bone
                                 How she gnawed it
                                 How she clawed it
                                 When she felt herself alone.
Girls are cruelest to themselves.
Someone like Emily Brontë,
who remained a girl all her life despite her body as a woman,
had cruelty drifted up in all the cracks of her like spring snow.
We can see her ridding herself of it at various times
with a gesture like she used to brush the carpet.
Reason with him and then whip him!
was her instruction (age six) to her father
regarding brother Branwell.
And when she was 14 and bitten by a rabid dog she strode (they say)
into the kitchen and taking red hot tongs from the back of the stove applied
them directly to her arm.
Cauterization of Heathcliff took longer.
More than thirty years in the time of the novel,
from the April evening when he runs out the back door of the kitchen
and vanishes over the moor
because he overheard half a sentence of Catherine’s
(“It would degrade me to marry Heathcliff”)
until the wild morning
when the servant finds him stark dead and grinning
on his rainsoaked bed upstairs in Wuthering Heights.
Heathcliff is a pain devil.
If he had stayed in the kitchen
long enough to hear the other half of Catherine’s sentence
(“so he will never know how I love him”)
Heathcliff would have been set free.
But Emily knew how to catch a devil.
She put into him in place of a soul
the constant cold departure of Catherine from his nervous system
every time he drew a breath or moved thought.
She broke all his moments in half,
with the kitchen door standing open.
I am not unfamiliar with this half-life.
But there is more to it than that.
Heathcliff’s sexual despair
arose out of no such experience in the life of Emily Brontë,
so far as we know. Her question,
which concerns the years of inner cruelty that can twist a person into a pain
    devil,
came to her in a kindly firelit kitchen
(“kichin” in Emily’s spelling) where she
and Charlotte and Anne peeled potatoes together
and made up stories with the old house dog Keeper at their feet.
There is a fragment
of a poem she wrote in 1839
(about six years before Wuthering Heights) that says:
                            That iron man was born like me
                            And he was once an ardent boy:
                            He must have felt in infancy
                            The glory of a summer sky.
Who is the iron man?
My mother’s voice cuts across me,
from the next room where she is lying on the sofa.
Is that you dear?
Yes Ma.
Why don’t you turn on a light in there?
Out the kitchen window I watch the steely April sun
jab its last cold yellow streaks
across a dirty silver sky.
Okay Ma. What’s for supper?
LIBERTY
Liberty means different things to different people.
I have never liked lying in bed in the morning.
Law did.
My mother does.
But as soon as the morning light hits my eyes I want to be out in it—
moving along the moor
into the first blue currents and cold navigation of everything awake.
I hear my mother in the next room turn and sigh and sink deeper.
I peel the stale cage of sheets off my legs
and I am free.
Out on the moor all is brilliant and hard after a night of frost.
The light plunges straight up from the ice to a blue hole at the top of the sky.
Frozen mud crunches underfoot. The sound
startles me back into the dream I was having
this morning when I awoke,
one of those nightlong sweet dreams of lying in Law’s
arms like a needle in water—it is a physical effort
to pull myself out of his white silk hands
as they slide down my dream hips—I
turn and face into the wind
and begin to run.
Goblins, devils and death stream behind me.
In the days and months after Law left
I felt as if the sky was torn off my life.
I had no home in goodness anymore.
To see the love between Law and me
turn into two animals gnawing and craving through one another
towards some other hunger was terrible.
Perhaps this is what people mean by original sin, I thought.
But what love could be prior to it?
What is prior?
What is love?
My questions were not original.
Nor did I answer them.
Mornings when I meditated
I was presented with a nude glimpse of my lone soul,
not the complex mysteries of love and hate.
But the Nudes are still as clear in my mind
as pieces of laundry that froze on the clothesline overnight.
There were in all thirteen of them.
Nude #2. Woman caught in a cage of thorns.
Big glistening brown thorns with black stains on them
where she twists this way and that way
unable to stand upright.
Nude #3. Woman with a single great thorn implanted in her forehead.
She grips it in both hands
endeavouring to wrench it out.
Nude #4. Woman on a blasted landscape
backlit in red like Hieronymus Bosch.
Covering her head and upper body is a hellish contraption
like the top half of a crab.
With arms crossed as if pulling off a sweater
she works hard at dislodging the crab.
It was about this time
I began telling Dr. Haw
about the Nudes. She said,
When you see these horrible images why do you stay with them?
Why keep watching? Why not
go away? I was amazed.
Go away where? I said.
This still seems to me a good question.
But by now the day is wide open and a strange young April light
is filling the moor with gold milk.
I have reached the middle
where the ground goes down into a depression and fills with swampy water.
It is frozen.
A solid black pane of moor life caught in its own night attitudes.
Certain wild gold arrangements of weed are visible deep in the black.
Four naked alder trunks rise straight up from it
and sway in the blue air. Each trunk
where it enters the ice radiates a map of silver pressures—
thousands of hair-thin cracks catching the white of the light
like a jailed face
catching grins through the bars.
Emily Brontë has a poem about a woman in jail who says
                A messenger of Hope, comes every night to me
                And offers, for short life, eternal Liberty.
I wonder what kind of Liberty this is.
Her critics and commentators say she means death
or a visionary experience that prefigures death.
They understand her prison
as the limitations placed on a clergyman’s daughter
by nineteenth-century life in a remote parish on a cold moor
in the north of England.
They grow impatient with the extreme terms in which she figures prison life.
“In so much of Brontë’s work
the self-dramatising and posturing of these poems teeters
on the brink of a potentially bathetic melodrama,”
says one. Another
refers to “the cardboard sublime” of her caught world.
I stopped telling my psychotherapist about the Nudes
when I realized I had no way to answer her question,
Why keep watching?
Some people watch, that’s all I can say.
There is nowhere else to go,
no ledge to climb up to.
Perhaps I can explain this to her if I wait for the right moment,
as with a very difficult sister.
“On that mind time and experience alone could work:
to the influence of other intellects it was not amenable,”
wrote Charlotte of Emily.
I wonder what kind of conversation these two had
over breakfast at the parsonage.
“My sister Emily
was not a person of demonstrative character,” Charlotte emphasizes,
“nor one on the recesses of whose mind and feelings,
even those nearest and dearest to her could,
with impunity, intrude unlicensed. . . .” Recesses were many.
One autumn day in 1845 Charlotte
“accidentally lighted on a MS. volume of verse in my sister Emily’s   
    handwriting.”
It was a small (4 x 6) notebook
with a dark red cover marked 6d.
and contained 44 poems in Emily’s minute hand.
Charlotte had known Emily wrote verse
but felt “more than surprise” at its quality.
“Not at all like the poetry women generally write.”
Further surprise awaited Charlotte when she read Emily’s novel,
not least for its foul language.
She gently probes this recess
in her Editor’s Preface to Wuthering Heights.
“A large class of readers, likewise, will suffer greatly
from the introduction into the pages of this work
of words printed with all their letters,
which it has become the custom to represent by the initial and final letter
    only—a blank
line filling the interval.”
Well, there are different definitions of Liberty.
Love is freedom, Law was fond of saying.
I took this to be more a wish than a thought
and changed the subject.
But blank lines do not say nothing.
As Charlotte puts it,
“The practice of hinting by single letters those expletives
with which profane and violent persons are wont to garnish their discourse,
strikes me as a proceeding which,
however well meant, is weak and futile.
I cannot tell what good it does—what feeling it spares—
what horror it conceals.”
I turn my steps and begin walking back over the moor
towards home and breakfast. It is a two-way traffic,
the language of the unsaid. My favourite pages
of The Collected Works Of Emily Brontë
are the notes at the back
recording small adjustments made by Charlotte
to the text of Emily’s verse,
which Charlotte edited for publication after Emily’s death.
“Prison for strongest [in Emily’s hand] altered to lordly by Charlotte.”
HERO
I can tell by the way my mother chews her toast
whether she had a good night
and is about to say a happy thing
or not.
Not.
She puts her toast down on the side of her plate.
You know you can pull the drapes in that room, she begins.
This is a coded reference to one of our oldest arguments,
from what I call The Rules Of Life series.
My mother always closes her bedroom drapes tight before going to bed at night.
I open mine as wide as possible.
I like to see everything, I say.
What’s there to see?
Moon. Air. Sunrise.
All that light on your face in the morning. Wakes you up.
I like to wake up.
At this point the drapes argument has reached a delta
and may advance along one of three channels.
There is the What You Need Is A Good Night’s Sleep channel,
the Stubborn As Your Father channel
and random channel.
More toast? I interpose strongly, pushing back my chair.
Those women! says my mother with an exasperated rasp.
Mother has chosen random channel.
Women?
Complaining about rape all the time
I see she is tapping one furious finger on yesterday’s newspaper
lying beside the grape jam.
The front page has a small feature
about a rally for International Women’s Day—
have you had a look at the Sears Summer Catalogue?
Nope.
Why, it’s a disgrace! Those bathing suits—
cut way up to here! (she points) No wonder!
You’re saying women deserve to get raped
because Sears bathing suit ads
have high-cut legs? Ma, are you serious?
Well someone has to be responsible.
Why should women be responsible for male desire? My voice is high.
Oh I see you’re one of Them.
One of Whom? My voice is very high. Mother vaults it.
And whatever did you do with that little tank suit you had last year the green
    one?
It looked so smart on you.
The frail fact drops on me from a great height
that my mother is afraid.
She will be eighty years old this summer.
Her tiny sharp shoulders hunched in the blue bathrobe
make me think of Emily Brontë’s little merlin hawk Hero
that she fed bits of bacon at the kitchen table when Charlotte wasn‘t around.
So Ma, we’ll go—I pop up the toaster
and toss a hot slice of pumpernickel lightly across onto her plate—
visit Dad today? She eyes the kitchen clock with hostility.
Leave at eleven, home again by four? I continue.
She is buttering her toast with jagged strokes.
Silence is assent in our code. I go into the next room to phone the taxi.
My father lives in a hospital for patients who need chronic care
about 50 miles from here.
He suffers from a kind of dementia
characterized by two sorts of pathological change
first recorded in 1907 by Alois Alzheimer.
First, the presence in cerebral tissue
of a spherical formation known as neuritic plaque,
consisting mainly of degenerating brain cells.
Second, neurofibrillary snarlings
in the cerebral cortex and in the hippocampus.
There is no known cause or cure.
Mother visits him by taxi once a week
for the last five years.
Marriage is for better or for worse, she says,
this is the worse.
So about an hour later we are in the taxi
shooting along empty country roads towards town.
The April light is clear as an alarm.
As we pass them it gives a sudden sense of every object
existing in space on its own shadow.
I wish I could carry this clarity with me
into the hospital where distinctions tend to flatten and coalesce.
I wish I had been nicer to him before he got crazy.
These are my two wishes.
It is hard to find the beginning of dementia.
I remember a night about ten years ago
when I was talking to him on the telephone.
It was a Sunday night in winter.
I heard his sentences filling up with fear.
He would start a sentence—about weather, lose his way, start another.
It made me furious to hear him floundering—
my tall proud father, former World War II navigator!
It made me merciless.
I stood on the edge of the conversation,
watching him thrash about for cues,
offering none,
and it came to me like a slow avalanche
that he had no idea who he was talking to.
Much colder today I guess. . . .
his voice pressed into the silence and broke off,
snow falling on it.
There was a long pause while snow covered us both.
Well I won’t keep you,
he said with sudden desperate cheer as if sighting land.
I’ll say goodnight now,
I won’t run up your bill. Goodbye.
Goodbye.
Goodbye. Who are you?
I said into the dial tone.
At the hospital we pass down long pink halls
through a door with a big window
and a combination lock (5—25—3)
to the west wing, for chronic care patients.
Each wing has a name.
The chronic wing is Our Golden Mile
although mother prefers to call it The Last Lap.
Father sits strapped in a chair which is tied to the wall
in a room of other tied people tilting at various angles.
My father tilts least, I am proud of him.
Hi Dad how y’doing?
His face cracks open it could be a grin or rage
and looking past me he issues a stream of vehemence at the air.
My mother lays her hand on his.
Hello love, she says. He jerks his hand away. We sit.
Sunlight flocks through the room.
Mother begins to unpack from her handbag the things she has brought for him,
grapes, arrowroot biscuits, humbugs.
He is addressing strenuous remarks to someone in the air between us.
He uses a language known only to himself,
made of snarls and syllables and sudden wild appeals.
Once in a while some old formula floats up through the wash—
You don’t say! or Happy birthday to you!—
but no real sentence
for more than three years now.
I notice his front teeth are getting black.
I wonder how you clean the teeth of mad people.
He always took good care of his teeth. My mother looks up.
She and I often think two halves of one thought.
Do you remember that gold-plated toothpick
you sent him from Harrod’s the summer you were in London? she asks.
Yes I wonder what happened to it.
Must be in the bathroom somewhere.
She is giving him grapes one by one.
They keep rolling out of his huge stiff fingers.
He used to be a big man, over six feet tall and strong,
but since he came to hospital his body has shrunk to the merest bone house—
except the hands. The hands keep growing.
Each one now as big as a boot in Van Gogh,
they go lumbering after the grapes in his lap.
But now he turns to me with a rush of urgent syllables
that break off on a high note—he waits,
staring into my face. That quizzical look.
One eyebrow at an angle.
I have a photograph taped to my fridge at home.
It shows his World War II air crew posing in front of the plane.
Hands firmly behind backs, legs wide apart,
chins forward.
Dressed in the puffed flying suits
with a wide leather strap pulled tight through the crotch.
They squint into the brilliant winter sun of 1942.
It is dawn.
They are leaving Dover for France.
My father on the far left is the tallest airman,
with his collar up,
one eyebrow at an angle.
The shadowless light makes him look immortal,
for all the world like someone who will not weep again.
He is still staring into my face.
Flaps down! I cry.
His black grin flares once and goes out like a match.
HOT
Hot blue moonlight down the steep sky.
I wake too fast from a cellar of hanged puppies
with my eyes pouring into the dark.
Fumbling
and slowly
consciousness replaces the bars.
Dreamtails and angry liquids
swim back down to the middle of me.
It is generally anger dreams that occupy my nights now.
This is not uncommon after loss of love—
blue and black and red blasting the crater open.
I am interested in anger.
I clamber along to find the source.
My dream was of an old woman lying awake in bed.
She controls the house by a system of light bulbs strung above her on wires.
Each wire has a little black switch.
One by one the switches refuse to turn the bulbs on.
She keeps switching and switching
in rising tides of very hot anger.
Then she creeps out of bed to peer through lattices
at the rooms of the rest of the house.
The rooms are silent and brilliantly lit
and full of huge furniture beneath which crouch
small creatures—not quite cats not quite rats
licking their narrow red jaws
under a load of time.
I want to be beautiful again, she whispers
but the great overlit rooms tick emptily
as a deserted oceanliner and now behind her in the dark
a rustling sound, comes—
My pajamas are soaked.
Anger travels through me, pushes aside everything else in my heart,
pouring up the vents.
Every night I wake to this anger,
the soaked bed,
the hot pain box slamming me each way I move.
I want justice. Slam.
I want an explanation. Slam.
I want to curse the false friend who said I love you forever. Slam.
I reach up and switch on the bedside lamp. Night springs
out the window and is gone over the moor.
I lie listening to the light vibrate in my ears
and thinking about curses.
Emily Brontë was good at cursing.
Falsity and bad love and the deadly pain of alteration are constant topics in
    her verse.
                     Well, thou halt paid me back my love!
                     But if there be a God above
                     Whose arm is strong, whose word is true,
                     This hell shall wring thy spirit too!
The curses are elaborate:
            There go, Deceiver, go! My hand is streaming wet;
            My heart’s blood flows to buy the blessing—To forget!
            Oh could that lost heart give back, back again to thine,
            One tenth part of the pain that clouds my dark decline!
But they do not bring her peace:
       Vain words, vain frenzied thoughts! No ear can hear me call—
       Lost in the vacant air my frantic curses fall. . . .
       Unconquered in my soul the Tyrant rules me still—
       Life bows to my control, but Love I cannot kill!
Her anger is a puzzle.
It raises many questions in me,
to see love treated with such cold and knowing contempt
by someone who rarely left home
“except to go to church or take a walk on the hills”
(Charlotte tells us) and who
had no more intercourse with Haworth folk
than “a nun has
of the country people who sometimes pass her convent gates.”
How did Emily come to lose faith in humans?
She admired their dialects, studied their genealogies,
“but with them she rarely exchanged a word.”
Her introvert nature shrank from shaking hands with someone she met on the moor.
What did Emily know of lover’s lies or cursive human faith?
Among her biographers
is one who conjectures she bore or aborted a child
during her six-month stay in Halifax,
but there is no evidence at all for such an event
and the more general consensus is that Emily did not touch a man in her 31
    years.
Banal sexism aside,
I find myself tempted
to read Wuthering Heights as one thick stacked act of revenge
for all that life withheld from Emily.
But the poetry shows traces of a deeper explanation.
As if anger could be a kind of vocation for some women.
It is a chilly thought.
                           
                              The heart is dead since infancy.
                              Unwept for let the body go.
Suddenly cold I reach down and pull the blanket back up to my chin.
The vocation of anger is not mine.
I know my source.
It is stunning, it is a moment like no other,
when one’s lover comes in and says I do not love you anymore.
I switch off the lamp and lie on my back,
thinking about Emily’s cold young soul.
Where does unbelief begin?
When I was young
there were degrees of certainty.
I could say, Yes I know that I have two hands.
Then one day I awakened on a planet of people whose hands occasionally   
    disappear—
From the next room I hear my mother shift and sigh and settle
back down under the doorsill of sleep.
Out the window the moon is just a cold bit of silver gristle low on fading banks
    of sky.
          Our guests are darkly lodged, I whispered, gazing through
          The vault . . .
THOU
The question I am left with is the question of her loneliness.
And I prefer to put it off.
It is morning.
Astonished light is washing over the moor from north to east.
I am walking into the light.
One way to put off loneliness is to interpose God.
Emily had a relationship on this level with someone she calls Thou. She describes Thou as awake like herself all night
and full of strange power.
Thou woos Emily with a voice that comes out of the night wind.
Thou and Emily influence one another in the darkness,
playing near and far at once.
She talks about a sweetness that “proved us one.”
I am uneasy with the compensatory model of female religious experience and yet,
there is no question,
it would be sweet to have a friend to tell things to at night,
without the terrible sex price to pay.
This is a childish idea, I know.
My education, I have to admit, has been gappy.
The basic rules of male-female relations
were imparted atmospherically in our family,
no direct speech allowed.
I remember one Sunday I was sitting in the backseat of the car.
Father in front.
We were waiting in the driveway for mother,
who came around the corner of the house
and got into the passenger side of the car
dressed in a yellow Chanel suit and black high heels.
Father glanced sideways at her.
Showing a good bit of leg today Mother, he said
in a voice which I (age eleven) thought odd.
I stared at the back of her head waiting for what she would say.
Her answer would clear this up.
But she just laughed a strange laugh with ropes all over it.
Later that summer I put this laugh together with another laugh
I overheard as I was going upstairs.
She was talking on the telephone in the kitchen.
Well a woman would be just as happy with a kiss on the cheek
most of the time but YOU KNOW MEN,
she was saying. Laugh.
Not ropes, thorns.
I have arrived at the middle of the moor
where the ground goes down into a low swampy place.
The swamp water is frozen solid.
Bits of gold weed
have etched themselves
on the underside of the ice like messages.
                        I’ll come when thou art saddest,
                        Laid alone in the darkened room;
                        When the mad day’s mirth has vanished,
                        And the smile of joy is banished,
                         I’ll come when the heart’s real feeling
                         Has entire, unbiased sway,
                         And my influence o’er thee stealing
                         Grief deepening, joy congealing,
                         Shall bear thy soul away.
                         Listen! ’tis just the hour,
                         The awful time for thee:
                         Dost thou not feel upon thy soul
                         A flood of strange sensations roll,
                         Forerunners of a sterner power,
                         Heralds of me?
Very hard to read, the messages that pass
between Thou and Emily.
In this poem she reverses their roles,
speaking not as the victim but to the victim.
It is chilling to watch Thou move upon thou,
who lies alone in the dark waiting to be mastered.
It is a shock to realize that this low, slow collusion
of master and victim within one voice
is a rationale
for the most awful loneliness of the poet’s hour.
She has reversed the roles of thou and Thou
not as a display of power
but to force out of herself some pity
for this soul trapped in glass,
which is her true creation.
Those nights lying alone
are not discontinuous with this cold hectic dawn.
It is who I am.
Is it a vocation of anger?
Why construe silence
as the Real Presence?
Why stoop to kiss this doorstep?
Why be unstrung and pounded flat and pine away
imagining someone vast to whom I may vent the swell of my soul?
Emily was fond of Psalm 130.
“My soul waiteth on Thou more than they that watch for the morning,
I say more than they that watch for the morning.”
I like to believe that for her the act of watching provided a shelter,
that her collusion with Thou gave ease to anger and desire:
”In Thou they are quenched as a fire of thorns,“ says the psalmist.
But for myself I do not believe this, I am not quenched—
with Thou or without Thou I find no shelter.
I am my own Nude.
And Nudes have a difficult sexual destiny.
I have watched this destiny disclose itself
in its jerky passage from girl to woman to who I am now,
from love to anger to this cold marrow,
from fire to shelter to fire.
What is the opposite of believing in Thou—
merely not believing in Thou? No. That is too simple.
That is to prepare a misunderstanding.
I want to speak more clearly.
Perhaps the Nudes are the best way.
Nude #5. Deck of cards.
Each card is made of flesh.
The living cards are days of a woman’s life.
I see a great silver needle go flashing right through the deck once from end to
    end.
Nude #6 I cannot remember.
Nude #7. White room whose walls,
having neither planes nor curves nor angles,
are composed of a continuous satiny white membrane
like the flesh of some interior organ of the moon.
It is a living surface, almost wet.
Lucency breathes in and out.
Rainbows shudder across it.
And around the walls of the room a voice goes whispering,Be very careful. Be very careful.
Nude #8. Black disc on which the fires of all the winds
are attached in a row.
A woman stands on the disc
amid the winds whose long yellow silk flames
flow and vibrate up through her.
Nude #9. Transparent loam.
Under the loam a woman has dug a long deep trench.
Into the trench she is placing small white forms, I don’t know what they are.
Nude #10. Green thorn of the world poking up
alive through the heart of a woman
who lies on her back on the ground.
The thorn is exploding
its green blood above her in the air.Everything it is it has, the voice says.
Nude #11. Ledge in outer space.
Space is bluish black and glossy as solid water
and moving very fast in all directions,
shrieking past the woman who stands pinned
to nothing by its pressure.
She peers and glances for some way to go, trying to lift her hand but cannot.
Nude #12. Old pole in the wind.
Cold currents are streaming over it
and pulling out
into ragged long horizontal black lines
some shreds of ribbon
attached to the pole.
I cannot see how they are attached—
notches? staples? nails? All of a sudden the wind changes
and all the black shreds rise straight up in the air
and tie themselves into knots,
then untie and float down.
The wind is gone.
It waits.
By this time, midway through winter,
I had become entirely fascinated with my spiritual melodrama.
Then it stopped.
Days passed, months passed and I saw nothing.
I continued to peer and glance, sitting on the rug in front of my sofa
in the curtainless morning
with my nerves open to the air like something skinned.
I saw nothing.
Outside the window spring storms came and went.
April snow folded its huge white paws over doors and porches.
I watched a chunk of it lean over the roof and break off
and fall and I thought,
How slow! as it glided soundlessly past,
but still—nothing. No nudes.
No Thou.
A great icicle formed on the railing of my balcony
so I drew up close to the window and tried peering through the icicle,
hoping to trick myself into some interior vision,
but all I saw
was the man and woman in the room across the street
making their bed and laughing.
I stopped watching.
I forgot about Nudes.
I lived my life,
which felt like a switched-off TV.
Something had gone through me and out and I could not own it.
“No need now to tremble for the hard frost and the keen wind.
Emily does not feel them,”
wrote Charlotte the day after burying her sister.
Emily had shaken free.
A soul can do that.
Whether it goes to join Thou and sit on the porch for all eternity
enjoying jokes and kisses and beautiful cold spring evenings,
you and I will never know. But I can tell you what I saw.
Nude #13 arrived when I was not watching for it.
It came at night.
Very much like Nude #1.
And yet utterly different.
I saw a high hill and on it a form shaped against hard air.
It could have been just a pole with some old cloth attached,
but as I came closer
I saw it was a human body
trying to stand against winds so terrible that the flesh was blowing off the bones.
And there was no pain.
The wind
was cleansing the bones.
They stood forth silver and necessary.
It was not my body, not a woman’s body, it was the body of us all.
It walked out of the light.
 
~~~
All this tall grass has ruined my gold
acrylic nails & I know something’s dead
just beyond my window. I grew up
with rats running my floorboards
& know the smell straining from a body
once caught in a trap. In the city
what little I have of an ass
is always out, a simple wind blow
from Marilyn Monroe-ing the street.
Here, in all this nature, there is nobody
but me & my 5 friends for a week
& I promised myself I’d be naked
but the first day I found a tick
clinging to my arm hair for dear
life & decided no way I’m exposing
my pussy to the elements. My love
for nature is like my love for most things:
fickle & theoretical.
Too many bugs & I want a divorce.
Last week, before I was here
my uncle drove me from our city
to the suburbs & sang “Project Chick”
in the car. When we parked
he asked me to take off my shoes
& there we walked, silent, barefoot
circling the lake, trying to not step
in goose shit.
He walked in front & I trailed behind
both our hands clasped behind our backs.    When you were my daughter,
    those were the happiest days of my life.
    I wish you would come home.
~~~
Glitz girls in the spackle. Teen climbed
The boughed over stair. Stole lace to begin again
In darkness, a fingering salt. Print
Delighted the line to lined
Pink. Was doll-sized, weighted out. Was flat-reaped sigh
And dollar bin plaid. Fridays we stayed in
Till in coughed through with dry heat. Men
Grew approximate in their longing for something to mine.
Sippy cup of burn, acrylic camel, and melting kohl
Was a hiding past boyish. We shone with miraculous
Droll. Don’t try to kiss me, she was always saying. Older
Than a watch, the girl who pays starch to hush
Meat. Gargantuan between grown and still us,
I leave her orange street, my wanting ode
~~~
(for Caroline Ireland)



They were to have been a love gift,
but when she slit the paper funnel,
they both saw they were fake; false flowers
he'd picked in haste from the store's display,
handmade coloured stuff, stiff as crinoline.
Instantly she thought of women's hands
cutting in grimy light by a sweatshop window;
rough plank tables strewn with cut-out
flower heads: lily, iris, primula, scentless
chrysanthemums, pistils rigged on wire
in crowns of sponge-tipped stamens,
sepals and petals perfect, perfectly
immune to menaces from the garden.
Why so wrong, so...flattening? Why not instead
symbols of unchanging love?
                                       Yet pretty enough,
she considered, arranging them in a vase
with dry grass and last summer's hydrangeas
whose deadness was still (how to put it?)
alive, or maybe the other side of life.
Two sides, really, of the same thing?
She laughed a little, such ideas were embarrassing
even when kept to oneself,
but her train of thought
carried her in its private tunnel through supper,
and at bedtime, brushing her teeth,
she happened to look up at the moon.
Its sunlit face was turned, as always, in her direction.The full moon, she couldn't help thinking,
though we see only half of it.
It was an insight she decided she could
share with him, but when he joined her
and together they lay in the dark,
there seemed no reason to say anything.
The words, in any case, would be wrong,
would escape or disfigure her meaning.Good was the syllable she murmured to him,
fading into sleep. And just for a split second,
teetering on the verge of it, she believed
everything that had to be was understood.
~~~
1
Who knew it’﻿﻿﻿s quite all right that I downed three
gin-and-tonics (can’﻿﻿﻿t fit male inside
female part on fanny pack) at four
o’﻿﻿﻿clock the Dyke March day of NY Pride?
Who knew Manhattan streets would liquefy
and lurch with dames sans bras, sans hair, sans shirt
in step with beer-can band led by a skirt-
ed trans in green brassiere, led by the cops
whose sentries are staid as posts with glasses on,
lined up beside the march like S/M tops?
(They seem to think Gay Pride’﻿﻿﻿s this weekend’﻿﻿﻿s yawn.)
(Pit stop at McD’﻿﻿﻿s, can’﻿﻿﻿t clip pack back on.)
Who knew she’﻿﻿﻿d march beside me hand-in-hand
and who’﻿﻿﻿d expect me to remember names
when Liz’﻿﻿﻿s girlfriend saw us and waved “Hi.
It’﻿﻿﻿s . . . Anna”? (CNN shot feed, then frames.)
Booze-stymied by the glare of girls and sky,
how could I choose? Should I grip hand, or pray
wondering: Is today today the day
she’﻿﻿﻿ll let me turn the key, lead her inside?
 
     2
Okay, I’﻿﻿﻿m sober now. Today is just
the kind of day she talks but feels no lust.
 
     3
Beside her isn’﻿﻿﻿t bad. Fan-stirred, the air
is humid and the theater is packed.
An ear-cuffed thespian tries to fix the cold,
our leading ladies sweat it out in back.
A prim man to my right begins to sneeze.
My nose is in agreement. The perfume
from Queen Mother there could clear the room.
This shadow play across her face is fine.
Her arm’﻿﻿﻿s near mine, which means exactly nothing.
Hope’﻿﻿﻿s hope hums on through separate listening.
That skull, opaque to me as Midland’﻿﻿﻿s vault,
her silky crop, its pepper dabbed with salt —
I chuckle at an apt sardonic line.
Her suede complexion, lifts up, checks the time.
 
     4. Les Nouvceaux from La Nouvelle Justine
I don’﻿﻿﻿t love her. She doesn’﻿﻿﻿t love me. Neither
does this waiter who may think it strange
when young girls dine with staid dames twice their age
on salade de Bastille and pain de Sade.
I don’﻿﻿﻿t like sitting by her like wet cloth.
I don’﻿﻿﻿t like restaurants whose queers pawn sex
to the bachelor bunch who want a thrill.
I don’﻿﻿﻿t like dining with my, well, not-ex,
both measuring the humid air for signs
of sparks I see by parts will not ignite.
I’﻿﻿﻿d rather have a knock-down, drag-out fight
that cleared the joint than watch another guy
get spanked by Corset Kris, who’﻿﻿﻿d like to grab
a tit, not spend hip humping hairy thighs.
I’﻿﻿﻿d rather I were twice her age and wise.
I’﻿﻿﻿d spin cruel stories of past day of bliss
then give my own hands covert exercise
and send her home to bed without a kiss.
 
     5. L’﻿﻿﻿Addition
 
30 for the play and 10 for gins,
10 for two cabs and 40 for the eats,
at least the metro home was freezer-cold,
at least the Broadway Local still had seats
at 96th, the local went express.
I blistered home ten sockless humid blocks
back to my solo digs for solo sex.
I got this poem for my 90 bucks.
~~~
I am not murdered, and I am not missing, but parts of me have been disappeared.
— Leanne Simpson



They too know all too well that some cracks were built just for us to fall through.  We live in a world that tries to steal spirits each day; they steal ours by taking us away.
From Industrial Schools to forced assimilation, genocide means removal  of those who birth nations — our living threatens. Colonization has been choking
us for generations. I tell my girls they are vessels of spirit, air to lungs expanding; this world cannot breathe without us. There are days  I wish
I didn’t have to teach these lessons, but as an Indigenous womxn  silence is deadening. There is danger in being seen, our bodies are targets
marked for violence. We carry the Earth’s me too inside us,  a howling wind, our mothers & their mothers swallowed these bullets long ago.
The voices ricochet I wish I were invisible I wish I were invisible  I wish echoes  in my eardrums — we know what it’s like to live in fear. Colonialism’s bullet sits cocked,
waiting behind a finger on trigger. We breathe and speak and sing  for survival. We carve out in lines; we write — I know joy I know pain I know loveI know love I know — lessons we’ve carried throughout time. Should I go missing: don’t stop searching; drag every river until it turns red and the waters of our names
stretch a flood so wide it catches everything. And we find each other whole and sacred, alive and breathing and breathing and breathing.
~~~
Ten below, high of zero, 4:11 pm
flashed the alarm panel’s handsome blue touchscreen.
Without commotion or fire the afternoon
passed slowly, full of promise,
then disappointment.
Without heartbreak or break-in.
For company I had Kafka on my lap
and Qolsys vibrating lightly against the wall.4:34    ...    4:35    ...    There are all sorts of creatures in the world, I read,wretched, limited, dumb creatures
who have no language but mechanical cries
~~~
You said I will pull you out of my body in 237
ways. What you wanted was beautifully to
sever things. Here love: the same things. changed.
 
Finally: a taxonomy of afterthoughts. As though
you were the one who was
sleeping. Breathing in the marrow of would.
 
You, who are a valley of no, I hear the music leaking. (How she.
How she. How I.) You say low key and I do not believe you.
I forgive everything: the perseveration of skin.
 
My hands that are a chopping block and I
cannot touch him. I cannot touch him
without not touching me.
 
Because if you leave, and you are already leaving, there are three.
But you say less than three. And the couch, in your absence,
is crenellated. And who is going to watch us as we leave.
 
To add to the list of changing things: life preservers are no longer
about preservation. They have become less holy. P F D =
personal flotation device. Endlessly possible. Unlike wood.
 
Stacey May Fowles wants a lover who will hit her.
(I do not believe in submission.) I want you to erase me.
This is a kindness. A kindness you tell me. A kindness I do not deserve.
 
On the floor. By the bed. Hotel Congress. March 19, 2005.
Room #23. We are a long way from disintegrated. You said Now. Look at me. And I did. And you bloomed.
 
(When my mother died, I will say.
Many years after my mother has died.
But I will not believe her. I'll be like my grandmother who
 
despite my parade of girlfriends and her profession
that nobody should be mean to them, stilldoesn't believe in being queer.
 I don't believe in being dead,
I'll tell my dead mother. And just like you
she'll repeat herself. Happy New Year. Happy New Year. Happy New.)
 
I expect there will be a morning when you walk up to this very gate
while I am sitting here. I know this. I know you less each time I see you.
 I know this like I know you are more lonely than glass.
 
To your languishing. To your bubbly.
To your recent. To your hologram. To your desperately.
To your seeking. To your dictaphone. To your you.
 
Neuromuscular facilitation is just another way of saying
Vancouver. Always is yet a matter of roller derby. Just
in love with you. You, more than sleep.
 
In the top drawer is a photograph of them touching.
It is not so much that it is a photograph.
It is that it is a depiction of what. not could.
 
I want to tell you about my body. About testosterone
as unwitting art historian. About recovery. Me(n). What it feels like
underneath there. The part you cannot know. but should.
 
Either way. It's a house. It's a house
like everyone else has. I take things away.
I don't take them for good.
 
How delirious must we sound when we are falling.I miss you, you can't even imagine. And how bad
at math. Less than three. Less than three. Less than three.
 
And what if. I completely remember
it wrong. What if I remember there were two
of us. And then what if. there was only one death.
 
I do not believe in the existence of holes
that lead to nowhere. Muscle memory remains an enigma. Still, you can
touch her. You cannot touch her without not touching me.
 
(And still) you are not not a part of me. The world is
uncharacteristically unresponsive.
I could thank you. You stay with me. like grass.
 
~~~
Good Heav’n, I thank thee, since it was designedI should be framed, but of the weaker kind,That yet, my Soul, is rescued from the loveOf all those trifles which their passions move.Pleasures and praise and plenty have with meBut their just value. If allowed they be,Freely, and thankfully as much I taste,As will not reason or religion waste,If they’re denied, I on my self can live,And slight those aids unequal chance does give.When in the sun, my wings can be displayed,And, in retirement, I can bless the shade.
~~~
for the Geechee Gullah Ring Shouters



One of the women greeted me.
I love you, she said. She didn't
Know me, but I believed her,
And a terrible new ache
Rolled over in my chest,
Like in a room where the drapes
Have been swept back. I love you,
I love you, as she continued
Down the hall past other strangers,
Each feeling pierced suddenly
By pillars of heavy light.
I love you, throughout
The performance, in every
Handclap, every stomp.
I love you in the rusted iron
Chains someone was made
To drag until love let them be
Unclasped and left empty
In the center of the ring.
I love you in the water
Where they pretended to wade,
Singing that old blood-deep song
That dragged us to those banks
And cast us in. I love you,
The angles of it scraping at
Each throat, shouldering past
The swirling dust motes
In those beams of light
That whatever we now knew
We could let ourselves feel, knew
To climb. O Woods—O Dogs—                       
O Tree—O Gun—O Girl, run—
O Miraculous Many Gone—
O Lord—O Lord—O Lord—
Is this love the trouble you promised?
~~~
I have to tell you, there are times when the sun strikes me like a gong, and I remember everything, even your ears.
~~~
Trying to see the proportional relation
Of one memory to another
One is so strange, and then
To try and see what looms
And doesn’t for the other person
Who was there, it gets stranger,
Especially when you’ve read
His email.
I don’t know how people
Understand their lives, measure
Their sensations against “objective”
Or so-to-speak democratic estimations,
Whether people accept the externality
Of events, “events,” as things
That happen to them. I refuse
To accept some coagulate
Of other people’s
Impressions in exchange for this
Privacy, no matter how flawed it is.
This is lyric poetry. It has to be. It has
No other hope. What was it
About you and me that made whatever
Happen to us. In New York
Everything fell apart. What I dreaded
And expected.
But still. Tonight
It is dark and the weather is cooler
Than it’s been. It has taken
A while for Fall to break; the global
Warming kept me in summer
Love with you like I was under a
Fermata. Now that the times
Are changing, I feel
Even more for you; or I feel nothing.
I can’t tell; it’s kind
Of scary. I was sick of thinking
About you this morning but
I was listening to Bob Dylan and Leonard
Cohen in order to think about
You for literary purposes.
When I feel nothing for a person
I get scared I’m losing my humanity
And that turning cold means
My heart’s been botoxed: we’re
All fucked.
I watched a movie on YouTube
Called Ladies and Gentlemen, MisterLeonard Cohen that was made when
He was still just a poet and only
Famous in Canada.
He’s a pretentious little nerd
In it, self-important, teacher’s pet wit.
I think that, making music, he became
So much nakeder, much more desperate.
The talent, real, even pure, evenNatural, had to ripen in
The artificial man.
Alain Badiou, on the day
Of his class, said, “Because an event
Is pure rapture, an event disappears
Immediately: it does not exist
Objectively, but only by appearing
And disappearing.” This is both
Precise and vague; it is attractive
I guess. I guess since you and me did not
Disappear immediately, it was
Not pure rapture, not in these
Terms, but my smile
Was real each time I swallowed
Your cum. Getting
Fucked by you was great; I could
Feel it in my organs, but
You didn’t make me go insane
Except for maybe once
Or twice. Actually maybe I am
Being unfair. Maybe the fucking really
Was that great. In this moment I
Can’t remember.
I just read a poetry
Review in which the reviewer
States that a certain book
Made his cock feel as though
It were tall as a tree. That’s
Nice. I have no idea
What it feels like to have
A cock. Sometimes I feel
As though I’m getting close
To understanding and then
Something happens to make
Me have no clue again. When Sinan
Fucks me, we lose our individuality
So severely it’s like we’re both
Gasping after an animal that’s his
Cock that is beyond us and I lose
All sense of the world. His cock’s
Not even him, and he’s not him either
And we aren’t anything.
It’s strange, the possessive. Didn’t Thomas
Mann write a book called HerrUnd Hund or something like that?
Man’s best friend. What belongs
To him. Me and Sunder
Talked about how scary and arousing
It is to watch men masturbate, cos
Everyone relates differently to his.
Like dicks are always almost but never
Quite another. Je est un autre,
Said that brat Arthur Rimbaud.
I am definitely in love with you
As I write this. You are so petty
And superfluous I cannot stand
You. Sinan is definitely
In love with me. I know, because
I saw him tonight. I love
Him too. You are gracious
To accord me the space and time
In which to develop, or to elaborate
Upon, as the French say, these
Extreme emotions I am, despite
The odds and certain lapses,
So capable of feeling.
It was good to slap
Your face and to admit
That your asshole
Made me nervous.
Your eyes had a way
Of going soft and shiny
When you said the really
Tender things. We admitted
It was intimidating
For us both to hear each other describe
People we’ve fucked and been
In love with. I’m proud of what
We accomplished together. Alain Badiou
Ended his class with a reading
Of “Ariane et Barbe-Bleue” which
Is an opera by Paul Dukas. You
And me had gone pretty far
By the time this day came, and
Something very fragile in me breaks
When somebody says my name, or
Even a variant of it. I was tired.
I think Badiou discusses “Ariane”
In Being and Event which
I have not read. In class he said
That the story of the opera is
About the relationship between law
And freedom, and that it shows
That the desire for freedom is not
So simple. Ariane experiences an Event
That causes her to demand freedom, Badiou
Said, but she is unable to convince anybody
Else, any other women to want freedom; she ends up alone.
She genuinely falls in love with the wicked
Bluebeard at the beginning. Bluebeard
Who previously got women by having a castle
To lock them in. This woman Ariane
Does not have to be taken
By force. When she enters
His castle he hands
Her seven keys, six
Of which he gives her permission
To use, and leaves. She hears the cries
Of his other, imprisoned wives,
Coming from behind a door. So she uses
The forbidden key, releasing them.
Meanwhile Bluebeard is assaulted
By the local peasants, who want
To free Ariane, fearing her fate will turn out like
That of the women who came before her.
But Ariane is already free
In herself, and proves this freedom
By bringing the wounded Bluebeard
Home, caring tenderly for him, and then
Declaring that she’s leaving him for good.
By the end Bluebeard’s shattered, sobbing,
Bleeding. Ariane
Invites the other wives to leave with her
In a wrenching aria, pleading
With them one by one to taste
With her the freedom awaiting
Them, The World. But they all prefer confinement
Even though they had longed
For freedom before Ariane opened
Their door. Once liberty arrived they were no
Longer capable of it, preferring to serve; even a gutted,
Hollowed-out power. Ariane exits
Alone. The end. Badiou narrated
This with emotion and
I cried. Maybe cos I was tired and
That thing about my name or because
I am not heroic or free.
I had missed half of Alain Badiou’s
Lectures messing around with you
On the couch by the fire; in the women’s
Toilets; up on the hill. If this were a suitable parable,
And it isn’t, I would try to tell myself
That those very early mornings in Brooklyn when I sat
Up in your bed feeling wrong and
Got dressed and walked away, I should
Have stayed away cos I don’t need you.
Maybe I don’t need you. But I want
You. Maybe I don’t love you. But
I am getting to know you. Maybe
What made me cry in class was how tired
I was and how sad and hard
It is, and how rare, to undertake an act
That’s truly free, and not just a response
To a confused surge of drives and  fears.
~~~
All my life I’ve asked my master
Why I am unable to choose
This sweet man or fancy shoes
Over this stranger, more difficult lover
And these expensive but practical loafers
And why I am unable to author
A book exhibiting my full potential
And have focused instead on inconsequential
Letters to strange and difficult lovers
Who by my letters were never changed.
I certainly haven’t been constrained
By terrible parents or trauma or poverty
And even if I had it wouldn’t explain
My propensity for misery
Anymore than it would my
Propensity for joy.
Maybe I’m just a procrastinator
As life is a procrastination of death
And each breath just a procrastination of breath
And friends a procrastination of work
And work a procrastination of love
And love a procrastination I’m just not above.
~~~
You left me – Sire – two Legacies –
A Legacy of Love
A Heavenly Father would suffice
Had He the offer of –
You left me Boundaries of Pain –
Capacious as the Sea –
Between Eternity and Time –
Your Consciousness – and me –
~~~
They broke up and she, either fed up or drunk or undone,
          ached to get back inside. Officials surmise
she climbed a ladder to his roof, removed          the chimney cap and entered feet first. Long story short,
she died there. Stuck. Like a tragic Santa. Struggling          for days, the news explains. It was a smell that led
to the discovery of her body. One neighbor          speaks directly into the microphone, asks how a person
could disregard so much: the damper, the flue,          the smoke shelf. He can’t imagine what it was she faced.
The empty garage. The locked back door. And is that          a light on in the den? They show us the grass
where they found her purse. And it’s not impossible to picture          her standing on the patio — abandoned — the mind
turning obscene, all hopes pinned on refastening the snap.          Then spotting the bricks rising above the roof
and at first believing and then knowing, sun flashing its          god-blinding light behind it, that the chimney was the way.
~~~
First, Beulah has no idea where the damn grape is.
She just got her manicure and frankly could care less.
She does find the cocky Cockney cute.
But, so does that glittery Lil and well---
It’s Lil’s Big Show.
 
Lil has blood on her hands, and rubs in the almond
scented lotion, while she waits for that peeled grape.
 
Beulah pours a large portion of gin
and recalls the Minstrel shows, Bessie Smith,
chicken dinners in a picnic basket,
and a guy named Roy. He was no prince,
but a king of the bedroom rambles.
 
Elsewhere, boots are beating the ground, leaving
bloodied feet and untended harvests
as glass breaks across the faces of Polish Jews
and the Spanish Republicans fight black clad insurgents.
More boots, pretty, shiny, well-made boots.
“until the war” says Tom in  The Glass Menagerie.
When America  sits  in a “dark room” and watches
“until the war”.  Death’s stench rolls across
the Atlantic, a powerful fog.  Meanwhile,
 
The dapper heroes roam landscapes as fake
as their stage names and the heroines roll
up their stockings or sweat the chorus line  
But not
Miss Lil and the disobedient Beulah, both swaying
large hips and rolling brown eyes, generously
Awaiting a man’s tongue sucking
 
For Gertrude Howard (1892-1934)
~~~
I am not saying “mark my words,”as the thief says early each winter.He leaves nothing of value. He too wants.A brute with language, he has a fondnessfor preaching. I am bathed to luster.Memories move musically through my bones.He sings above, vaults off a horse with feignedkindness, lands so fancy. Letting go of this, sitting with tropical leaves the size of menin a terrarium, I am beautiful. He means well, admonishing women. He is lucky with the show of crankiness.What does it mean to let go the envy?I sometimes hope stars don’t spread themselvesover New York’s lights. Performing for himself,glasses glittering, he reads stories of poverty,claims them all as his own. Here in Colorado irises of all colors unfoldoutwards to the half-hidden sun. On the cracked cement, chilly before rain, I see perpetual beginnings. I’m going to forget him:lock him in a box in my head,lock him in the haunt of violins, let go what’s his in the hurl of breath of my groans.
~~~
What do we need for love—a midnight fire
Flinging itself by fistfuls up the chimney
In soft bright snatches? Do we need the snow,
Gentle as silence, covering the scars
Of weeks of hunger, years of shabby having?
Summer or winter? A heaven of stars? A room?
The smiling mouth, the sadness of desire
Are everywhere the same. If lovers go
Along an unknown road, they find no less
What is familiar. Let them stay at home,
And all will still be strange. This they know
Who with each heartbeat fight the fear of change.
~~~
Guy calls the doctor, says the wife’s   
contractions are five minutes apart.   
Doctor says, Is this her first child?
guy says, No, it’s her husband.
I promise to try to remember who   
I am. Wife gets up on one elbow,
says, I wanted to get married.   
It seemed a fulfillment of some
several things, a thing to be done.   
Even the diamond ring was some
thing like a quest, a thing they   
set you out to get and how insane
the quest is; how you have to turn   
it every way before you can even
think to seek it; this metaphysical   
refraining is in fact the quest. Who’d
have guessed? She sighs, I like   
the predictability of two, I like
my pleasures fully expected,   
when the expectation of them
grows patterned in its steady   
surprise. I’ve got my sweet
and tumble pat. Here on earth,   
I like to count upon a thing
like that. Thus explained   
the woman in contractions
to her lover holding on
the telephone for the doctor
to recover from this strange   
conversational turn. You say
you’re whom? It is a pleasure   
to meet you. She rolls her
eyes, but he’d once asked her   Am I your first lover? and she’d   
said, Could be. Your face looks   
familiar.
~~~
     Was Helen stronger than Achilles even "as the arrows fell"? That could not be, but he recognised in her some power other than her legendary beauty.
 
                 He could name Helena,
                 but the other he could not name;
                 she was a lure, a light,
                 an intimate flame, a secret kept
                 even from his slaves, the elect,
                 the innermost hierarchy;
                 only Helena could be named
                 and she was a public scandal
                 in any case, a cause of shame
                 to Agamemnon and Menelaus;
                 it was not that she was beautiful,
                 true, she stood on the Walls,
                 taut and indifferent
                 as the arrows fell;
                 it was not that she was beautiful,
                 there were others,
                 in spite of the legend,
                 as gracious, as tall;
                 it was not that she was beautiful,
                 but he stared and stared
                 across the charred wood
                 and the smouldering flame,
                 till his eyes cleared
                 and the smoke drifted away.
                
~~~
In my seeing there was a blank and he filled that blank
with words, there were words for darkness which made it lift,
there were words for cover which ripped them off,
there were legs that crossed and hearts that crossed,
promises red and read, and the pluck of banjo had a name
for that twang, and the way he called the world into notice,
that had a word, too. Once I saw I couldn’t unsee
and the worst was that the light glaring from the letters
left blue haze under my eyelids. There are no photographs
of this time, and I can only go by what others
tell me: I was blurred and erratic, I drew a circle
of white chalk around me and called myself inviolate,
I watched for horses on the horizon, my walls
were under siege from smaller men who called themselves
heroes. They say I reached over the balustrade and picked
up the tiny ships and threw them over the edge of the world.
I tore my hair, cut one breast from my body and plattered it
as around my fortifications one man pulled another man
behind his chariot. If they say that’s how I was,
that’s how I was. I have no words for the one in the mirror
who apes me every morning. She’s not the one I remember
imagining as a young girl. There must be a way to unsee
how I tap the glass and she taps back, and which wall,
which Cassandra weeping—everything I saw I spoke to his ear,
and the wall crashed into place between us, the horse
had a bellyful of it, the blank was full of small soldiers,
and he turned from my beauty and said my name.
~~~
We cannot live, except thus mutuallyWe alternate, aware or unaware,The reflex act of life: and when we bearOur virtue onward most impulsively,Most full of invocation, and to beMost instantly compellant, certes, thereWe live most life, whoever breathes most airAnd counts his dying years by sun and sea.But when a soul, by choice and conscience, dothThrow out her full force on another soul,The conscience and the concentration bothMake mere life, Love. For Life in perfect wholeAnd aim consummated, is Love in sooth,As nature’s magnet-heat rounds pole with pole.
~~~
So why assume [she]
Is cold why not
Assume drunk
“Legless”
Can keep up pretty good though
With your car in the rural night
You are a passenger
Your left leg lolls and
Your friend reaches a hand
Across the emergency brake
Which points now at the base of
The gearstick shaft
And can point at its head
But nowhere else
Thus does not
“Speak”
And unless overused abused is
Reliable
Whereas anyone can misunderstand
Or willfully misinterpret the
Point and represent
Are very different (Moon!)
6am and the snow
Sent enough light upward
For this window to
Transmit and permit
My seeing
I heard more than I saw
I understood less than I heard
I was well read compared to
But not compared to
I begin to feel warm in
My crotch, as if a wodge
Of moist electric blanket
Were stuck in there
And my friend was not
Riding on the other side of the brake
—I mean emergency—he is not
Fox-hunting and on
A horse in a novel
In which the brake
Is a strip of greenwood
He is downstairs  the coffee’s
Made  but he ignores
My text   He works alone
And I will have to go down there
~~~
When our two souls stand up erect and strong, Face to face, silent, drawing nigh and nigher, Until the lengthening wings break into fire At either curvéd point, — what bitter wrong Can the earth do to us, that we should not long Be here contented ? Think. In mounting higher, The angels would press on us, and aspire To drop some golden orb of perfect song Into our deep, dear silence. Let us stay Rather on earth, Belovèd, — where the unfit Contrarious moods of men recoil away And isolate pure spirits, and permit A place to stand and love in for a day, With darkness and the death-hour rounding it.
~~~
Oh, come, my lad, or go, my lad,    And love me if you like! I hardly hear the door shut    Or the knocker strike. Oh, bring me gifts or beg me gifts,    And wed me if you will! I'd make a man a good wife,    Sensible and still. And why should I be cold, my lad,    And why should you repine, Because I love a dark head    That never will be mine? I might as well be easing you    As lie alone in bed And waste the night in wanting    A cruel dark head! You might as well be calling yours    What never will be his, And one of us be happy;    There's few enough as is.
~~~
You were never a man
in the television sense of the word.
I was never a wild Slinky
in the sex-club sense of a toy.
You were never a tobacco store
in the Modernist sense of a trope.
I was never a snowdrop
in the candy store sense of a treat.
You were never Day-glo
in the fashionista sense of a scarf.
I was never withyouallthetime
in the username sense of a self.
You were never a strumpet
in the toothache sense of an insult.
I was never a tooting horn
in the childhood sense of a game.
You were never a hole-in-my-heart   
in the country singer sense of a vista.
I was never a paper doll
in the pyromaniac sense of a pal.
You were never a parenthesis
in the phony secret sense of a sign.
I was never red lipstick
in the pulp novel sense of a threat.
You were never a word
in the mystic sense of an obstacle.
I was never a shaking castanet   
in the midnight sense of a song.
~~~
I lift my heavy heart up solemnly, As once Electra her sepulchral urn, And, looking in thine eyes, I overturn The ashes at thy feet. Behold and see What a great heap of grief lay hid in me, And how the red wild sparkles dimly burn Through the ashen greyness. If thy foot in scorn Could tread them out to darkness utterly, It might be well perhaps. But if instead Thou wait beside me for the wind to blow The grey dust up,... those laurels on thine head, O My beloved, will not shield thee so, That none of all the fires shall scorch and shred The hair beneath. Stand further off then! Go.
~~~
for Judith Radstone



Next to my own skin, her pearls. My mistress
bids me wear them, warm them, until evening
when I'll brush her hair. At six, I place them
round her cool, white throat. All day I think of her,
resting in the Yellow Room, contemplating silk
or taffeta, which gown tonight? She fans herself
whilst I work willingly, my slow heat entering
each pearl. Slack on my neck, her rope.
She's beautiful. I dream about her
in my attic bed; picture her dancing
with tall men, puzzled by my faint, persistent scent
beneath her French perfume, her milky stones.
I dust her shoulders with a rabbit's foot,
watch the soft blush seep through her skin
like an indolent sigh. In her looking-glass
my red lips part as though I want to speak.
Full moon. Her carriage brings her home. I see
her every movement in my head.... Undressing,
taking off her jewels, her slim hand reaching
for the case, slipping naked into bed, the way
she always does.... And I lie here awake,
knowing the pearls are cooling even now
in the room where my mistress sleeps. All night
I feel their absence and I burn.
~~~
Sweet shades why doe you seeke to give delight    To mee who deeme delight in this vilde place    Butt torment, sorrow, and mine owne disgrace    To taste of joy, or your vaine pleasing sight;Show them your pleasures who saw never night    Of greife, wher joyings fauning, smiling face    Appeers as day, wher griefe found never space    Yett for a sigh, a grone, or envies spite;Butt O on mee a world of woes doe ly,    Or els on mee all harmes strive to rely,    And to attend like servants bound to mee,Heat in desire, while frosts of care I prove,    Wanting my love, yett surfett doe with love    Burne, and yett freeze, better in hell to bee.
~~~
September is work to the center
Of arguments and controversies.
Prejudgments and incomprehensions.
What will I love if not that
That was enigma?
The years of infancy, Memory says,
And there we are, with the demon
Of the art of living
Traced on the glass of some window.
In the beauty of the night of May,
Clear of moon, to the lume of a candle
There was a design like the profile
Of a landscape almost abandoned. Gone
But not gone yet. It's fascinating,
These mysterious uncovered feelings.
Enigma of an afternoon of autumn, the picture
Of which is a composition
Of the eye of my mind. Every hour
That I watch this picture
I see again still that moment.
Nevertheless the moment is an enigma
For me, in how much is inexplicable.
The physical things hide in the architecture
Of the event. The enigma of a mock-up,
Of a shadow, the spectral and eternal aspect
Of the moment. Praises to you for being
One great box of surprise,
Your head the scene of a wonderful theater
Of the most tender gray of the fog
That joins the sky to the earth.
A tangling of truth and memory,
Mythology and iconography,
I watch with the eye
Of the mind the city that accommodates
That one beautiful day that is now infinite.
It deepens. It begins. The cyclical method.
Memory is deeply not alive; it's a mock-up
And this renders it hateful. Yet, it is not a fiction,
Is a truth, indeed a sad and monstrous truth.
I was assigned to you, together we were
A beautiful and melancholic picture.
This last picture is the realization
Of the overwhelming moment
In which the acute eye perceives you as a now
That is over. A now that is fixed
In the swept past.
~~~
each  night  I  count  ghostlets  of  how  my  body  was
wanted  /  behind with deadheading  /  rose hips have
come  /  behind with actions that count only  /  when
the  timing  is  right  /  I  took out  a contract  /  it was
imprudent  in  value  /  behind  with  asepsis  /  hello
microbes  of  my  body  /  we   sleep  together  /  hello
cats  /  I  make  my  bed  daily  /  of the three types of
hair on the sheets  /  only one is human  /  I count the
bedrooms  /  I never had sex in  /  but there were cars
 /   wild    woods   /   blackfly    has    got   to   all   the
nasturtiums  /  you cannot dig  up  a grapevine  /  and
expect shelter to come  /  I am touched by  your letter
/  writes  a  friend  /   you  prevaricate  desire   /   says
message  /  all  this  fucking  / with  no  hands  on  me
~~~
I was ill, lying on my bed of old papers,
when you came with white rabbits in your arms;
and the doves scattered upwards, flying to mothers,
and the snails sighed under their baggage of stone . . .
Now your tongue grows like celery between us:
Because of our love-cries, cabbage darkens in its nest;
the cauliflower thinks of her pale, plump children
and turns greenish-white in a light like the ocean’s.
I was sick, fainting in the smell of teabags,
when you came with tomatoes, a good poetry.
I am being wooed. I am being conquered
by a cliff of limestone that leaves chalk on my breasts.
~~~
Toward what island-home am I moving,not wanting to marry, not wanting too much of that emptiness at evening, as when I walked through a field at duskand felt wide in the night.And it was again the evening that drew meback to the field where I was most alone,compassed by stems and ruts, no light of the fixed stars, no flashing in the eyes, only heather pared by dry air, shedding a small feathered radiance when I looked away,an expanse whose deep sleep seemed an unending warren I had been given, to carry out such tasks—that I might find nothing dead.  And it was again the evening that drew meback to the field where I could sense no boundary—the smell of dry earth, cool arch of my neck, the darkness entirely within myself.  And when I shut my eyes there was no one.Only weeds in drifts of stillness, only stalks and gliding sky.Come, black anchor, let us not be harmed.The deer leafing in the dark.The old man at the table, unable to remember.The children whose hunger is just hunger, and never desire.
~~~
Vainly my heart had with thy sorceries striven:
It had no refuge from thy love,—no Heaven
But in thy fatal presence;—from afar
It owned thy power and trembled like a star
O’erfraught with light and splendor. Could I deem
How dark a shadow should obscure its beam?—
Could I believe that pain could ever dwell
Where thy bright presence cast its blissful spell?
Thou wert my proud palladium;—could I fear
The avenging Destinies when thou wert near?—Thou wert my Destiny;—thy song, thy fame,
The wild enchantments clustering round thy name,
Were my soul’s heritage, its royal dower;
Its glory and its kingdom and its power!
~~~
I
 
Students, look at this table
And now when you see a man six feet tall
You can call him a fathom.
 
Likewise, students when yes and you do that and other stuff
Likewise too the shoe falls upon the sun
And the alphabet is full of blood
And when you knock upon a sentence in the
Process of explication you are going to need a lot of rags
 
Likewise, hello and goodbye.
 
 
   II
 
Nick Algiers is my student
And he sits there in a heap in front of me thinking of suicide
And so, I am the one in front of him
And I dance around him in a circle and light him on fire
And with his face on fire, I am suddenly ashamed.
 
Likewise the distance between us then
Is the knife that is not marriage.
 
 
   III
 
Students, I can’t lie, I’d rather be doing something else, I guess
Like making love or writing a poem
Or drinking wine on a tropical island
With a handsome boy who wants to hold me all night.
 
I can’t lie that dreams are ridiculous.
And in dreaming myself upon the moon
I have made the moon my home and no one
Can ever get to me to hit me or kiss my lips.
 
And as my bridegroom comes and takes me away from you
You all ask me what is wrong and I say it is
That I will never win.
~~~
I know my leaving in the breakfast table mess.   
Bowl spills into bowl: milk and bran, bread crust   
crumbled. You push me back into bed.
More “honey” and “baby.”
Breath you tell my ear circles inside me,   
curls a damp wind and runs the circuit   
of my limbs. I interrogate the air,
smell Murphy’s Oil Soap, dog kibble.
No rose. No patchouli swelter. And your mouth—   
sesame, olive. The nudge of your tongue
behind my top teeth.
To entirely finish is water entering water.   
Which is the cup I take away?
More turning me. Less your arms reaching   
around my back. You ask my ear
where I have been and my body answers,   
all over kingdom come.
~~~
I’ll choose for myself next time
who I’ll reach out and take
as mine, in the way
I might stand at a fruit stall
having decided
to ignore the apples
the mangoes and the kiwis
but hold my hands above
a pile of oranges
as if to warm my skin
before a fire.
Not only have I chosen
oranges, but I’ll also choose
which orange — I’ll test
a few for firmness
scrape some rind off
with my fingernail
so that a citrus scent
will linger there all day.
I won’t be happy
with the first one I pick
but will try different ones
until I know you. How
will I know you?
You’ll feel warm
between my palms
and I’ll cup you like
a handful of holy water.
A vision will come to me
of your exotic land: the sun
you swelled under
the tree you grew from.
A drift of white blossoms
from the orange tree
will settle in my hair
and I’ll know.
This is how I will choose
you: by feeling you
smelling you, by slipping
you into my coat.
Maybe then I’ll climb
the hill, look down
on the town we live in
with sunlight on my face
and a miniature sun
burning a hole in my pocket.
Thirsty, I’ll suck the juice
from it. From you.
When I walk away
I’ll leave behind a trail
of lamp-bright rind.
~~~
If   love is like a doll’s shoe —the color of nascent snowthat laces over the ankle or the polychromatic beaded baby moccasins we saw lying in the museum drawerthat belonged to an infant from a sea tribe of seal hunters.Or the rutilant pink blossoms of the locust tree that bloomed in the dark while I slept dreaming of my arrival on a red-eye wearing a long to the floor skirt —not of a postulant, but of a flower vendoror a woman covering disfigurement. Freud believed that religious faith is a wish-fulfilling illusion.I can’t locate faith in a carved or uncarved pew.I’m more focused on the altar boy’s shoes. Under his white robe he’s wearing a man’s black loafers vastly oversized for his small feet withsufficient spare space for a coyote den in each toe.I want to buy him a kite.If   love is a mezzanine floor we will not fall from, a hand holding back my hair from my face as I’m sick on the side of the bus. The mouth so at home in the vicinity of pavement.Pew also means to enclose, as in men who were as willingly pewed in the parish church 
~~~
My weight is
four whippets,
two Chinese gymnasts,
half a shot-putter.
It can be measured
in bags of sugar, jam jars,
enough feathers for sixty pillows,
or a ﬂock of dead birds
but some days it’s more
than the house, the span
of Blair Athol Road.
I’m the Crooked Spire
warping itself,
doubled up over town.
I measure myself against
the sky in its winter coat,
peat traces in water, air
locked in the radiators at night,
against my own held breath,
or your unﬁnished sentences,
your hand on my back
like a passenger
touching the dashboard
when a driver brakes,
as if they could slow things down.
I measure myself against
love — heavier, lighter
than both of us.
~~~
Custom, whose laws we all allow,
   And bow before his shrine,Has so ordained, my friend, that you
   Are now my Valentine.Ah, could my humble Muse aspire
   To catch the flame divine!These are the gifts that I’d require
   For thee, my Valentine!May virtue o’er thy steps preside
   And in thy conduct shine;May truth and wisdom ever guide
   And guard my Valentine.May piety, seraphic maid,
   Her influence divineShed on thy head, and ever lead,
   And bless my Valentine.Life’s dangerous paths safe may’st thou tread,
   Shielded by Grace divine;And when these artless lines are read,
   Think on my Valentine!
~~~
I would like to decorate this silence,   
but my house grows only cleaner
and more plain. The glass chimes I hung   
over the register ring a little
when the heat goes on.
I waited too long to drink my tea.   
It was not hot. It was only warm.
 
~~~
For I have loved the blade with all my crippled
with all my awkward soul loved it for the shine
sheen for the ease and grace of doing what it was
made to do for I have loved the stubborn womb
its beloved intent have loved the hope and then
learned to love the lack for I have loved the water
the way it comes to me comes for me in all its
liquid mystery for I have loved what the water
loves its myriad vessels sky basin runnel channel
and vein for all it claims and contains for I have
loved its muscular flex its rise coil and fall so like
Leviathan's mighty desperate heart for I have loved
Leviathan for being only for being exactly
what god hated and what he made for being
water's own knife this wild unholy blade
 
~~~
It is not the moon, I tell you.
It is these flowers
lighting the yard.
I hate them.
I hate them as I hate sex,
the man’s mouth
sealing my mouth, the man’s
paralyzing body—
and the cry that always escapes,
the low, humiliating
premise of union—
In my mind tonight
I hear the question and pursuing answer
fused in one sound
that mounts and mounts and then
is split into the old selves,
the tired antagonisms. Do you see?
We were made fools of.
And the scent of mock orange
drifts through the window.
How can I rest?
How can I be content
when there is still
that odor in the world?
~~~
My Love? alas! I must not call you Mine,But to your envy’d Bride that Name resign:I must forget your lovely melting Charms,And be for ever Banisht from your Arms:For ever? oh! the Horror of that Sound!It gives my bleeding Heart a deadly wound:While I might hope, although my Hope was vain,It gave some Ease to my unpitty’d Pain,But now your Hymen doth all Hope exclude,And but to think is Sin; yet you intrudeOn every Thought; if I but close my Eyes,Methinks your pleasing Form besides me lies;With every Sigh I gently breath your Name,Yet no ill Thoughts pollute my hallow’d Flame;’Tis pure and harmless, as a Lambent Fire,And never mingled with a warm Desire:All I have now to ask of Bounteous Heaven,Is, that your Perjuries may be forgiven:That she who you have with your Nuptials blest,As She’s the Happiest Wife, may prove the Best:That all our Joys may light on you alone,Then I can be contented to have none:And never wish that you shou’d kinder be,Than now and then, to cast a Thought on Me:And, Madam, though the Conquest you have won,Over my Strephon, has my hopes undone;I’le daily beg of Heaven, he may beKinder to You, than he has been to Me.
~~~
There was terror already
in her love even before
she knew for sure her lover was the god.
Her forehead
skidded a little on the sweat
of his chest and close to his ear
Semele begged again for proof.
And it didn’t feel like a myth or a metaphor to her
as she burned up with the brightness she saw.
~~~
" Yes !" I answered you last night ;
  " No !" this morning, Sir, I say !Colours, seen by candle-light,
  Will not look the same by day.When the tabors played their best,
  Lamps above, and laughs below —Love me sounded like a jest,
  Fit for Yes or fit for No ! Call me false, or call me free —
  Vow, whatever light may shine,No man on your face shall see
  Any grief for change on mine.Yet the sin is on us both —
  Time to dance is not to woo —Wooer light makes fickle troth —
  Scorn of me recoils on you ! Learn to win a lady's faith
  Nobly, as the thing is high ;Bravely, as for life and death —
  With a loyal gravity.Lead her from the festive boards,
  Point her to the starry skies,Guard her, by your truthful words,
  Pure from courtship's flatteries.By your truth she shall be true —
  Ever true, as wives of yore —And her Yes, once said to you,
  SHALL be Yes for evermore.
~~~
I beat you with a hazel rod
Come to me in madness
I beat you with a bloodied rod
Come like an angel
I beat you with a rod from heaven
Come to me like a wild boar
*       *       *
Ninety-nine serpents—
ninety-nine flaming beasts—
go to Ion
Slip in by his shirt-collar
squat in his heart
scald him burn him   
turn his eyes to my eyes
his face to my face
his path to my house
Make him see me in the distance
a fine-feathered peacock   
make him pick me out as basil among weeds
make him tease me among the girls
Like following gold and silver
fall in step with my words
with my walk   
with my dance
*       *       *
Sweet boy
don't send so much longing—
send a little less
and come with it yourself
*       *       *
Tuesday, basket full of black,
how did you make me fall in love—
did you clip my hair
did you steal my footsteps?
How did you charm me—
with the hair of a mad wolf
with three straws from the bed
with splintered wood   
with the fairness of eyebrows
with a chip off the gate
with dark hair from a braid?
How drive every other love away?
*       *       *
Eagle, eagle, grow into a flying bird
Take yourself to Ion's house
What you find in his head   
take in your head
what you find in his ears   
take in your ears
what you find in his mouth   
take in your mouth
what you find in his hands   
take in your wings
Take that great wrong away in your feathers—
and what you find in your head   
put it in her head
And what you find in your feathers   
put it on the table   
in their house
~~~
For RLB



Pass by the showy rose, blabbing open, suckling a shiny beetle; pass by the changeless diamond that falls asleep in shadow— this love is a lichen, alga and fungus made one fleck, feeding on what it feeds, growing slightly faster than stone into a patch of gray lace, a double thumbprint, its bloom distinguishable, with practice, from its dormant phase, crocheting its singular habit over time, a faithful stain bound to its home, etching on the unmoved rock the only rune it knows.
~~~
The Eiffel Tower erected itself in my head,we couldn’t find the lifts, climbed the stairs.Of course there were fireworks.We stared at each other, rare exhibits in the Louvre —you licked my Mona Lisa smile right off.Of course we were both in imaginary Chanel.We drank warm cider and ate pancakes, yours flambéed.I got drunk, my tights laddered on both legs.Of course we experienced tachycardia at the Moulin Rouge.Our hotel, a boxed macaron on a navy boulevard —we spun around in the dark outside, rain-dizzy.Of course we slept at the Ritz.Our little room tucked into the corner, a pinkpocket you slipped into that night.Of course our fingers hunted for change.In the mirrored elevator I couldn’t meet your eye, Icrushed you into the laminated sample menu and died.Of course it was only la petite mort.
~~~
Toggle me up
on one last vanity flight
half drunk on a screw-top frizzante.
It takes a hell of a lot more to get me here
than it did when I had beauty, boys
when bedding me was the easy way to know me.
Don’t tuck me in
so tight. I’m not your grandma.
This rough blanket
its green red yellow indigo stripes
I traded for a perfectly warm beaver pelt.
Fly me once more
over my disloyal youth
and its hangdog slavering over men
whom age has de-sexed right along with me.
They broadcast impotent outrage
from aluminum tablets.
I collect speculums with Bakelite handles
arranging them by size
though it no longer matters.
~~~
(from her to ravish meaning ravine On the other side
artifice slumbers in the green. The shadow follows hour
by hour hollow and gloomy and which call me forth)
……………………………….grafted onto the sentenceo a long time distant to hang on my belly obscure parallel
images and tattoos age suggestive of the fingernail grazing
the thigh the valley get turned on
~~~
Just for this evening, let's not mock them.
Not their curtsies or cross-garters
or ever-recurring pepper trees in their gardens
promising, promising.
At least they had ideas about love.
All day we've driven past cornfields, past cows poking their heads
through metal contraptions to eat.
We've followed West 84, and what else?
Irrigation sprinklers fly past us, huge wooden spools in the fields,
lounging sheep, telephone wires,
yellowing flowering shrubs.
Before us, above us, the clouds swell, layers of them,
the violet underneath of clouds.
Every idea I have is nostalgia. Look up:
there is the sky that passenger pigeons darkened and filled—
darkened for days, eclipsing sun, eclipsing all other sound
with the thunder of their wings.
After a while, it must have seemed that they followed
not instinct or pattern but only
one another.
When they stopped, Audubon observed,
they broke the limbs of stout trees by the weight of the numbers.
And when we stop we'll follow—what?
Our hearts?
The Puritans thought that we are granted the ability to love
only through miracle,
but the troubadours knew how to burn themselves through,
how to make themselves shrines to their own longing.
The spectacular was never behind them.
Think of days of those scarlet-breasted, blue-winged birds above you.
Think of me in the garden, humming
quietly to myself in my blue dress,
a blue darker than the sky above us, a blue dark enough for storms,
though cloudless.
At what point is something gone completely?
The last of the sunlight is disappearing
even as it swells—
Just for this evening, won't you put me before you
until I'm far enough away you can
believe in me?
Then try, try to come closer—
my wonderful and less than.
~~~
1 Come, my Lucasia, since we see
   That Miracles Mens faith do move,By wonder and by prodigy
   To the dull angry world let’s prove
   There’s a Religion in our Love.2 For though we were design’d t’ agree,
   That Fate no liberty destroyes,But our Election is as free
   As Angels, who with greedy choice
   Are yet determin’d to their joyes.3 Our hearts are doubled by the loss,
   Here Mixture is Addition grown ;We both diffuse, and both ingross :
   And we whose minds are so much one,
   Never, yet ever are alone.4 We court our own Captivity
   Than Thrones more great and innocent :’Twere banishment to be set free,
   Since we wear fetters whose intent
   Not Bondage is, but Ornament.5 Divided joyes are tedious found,
   And griefs united easier grow :We are our selves but by rebound,
   And all our Titles shuffled so,
   Both Princes, and both Subjects too.6 Our Hearts are mutual Victims laid,
   While they (such power in Friendship lies)Are Altars, Priests, and Off’rings made :
   And each Heart which thus kindly dies,
   Grows deathless by the Sacrifice.
~~~
After Erik Satie



For an hour I forgot my fat self, my neurotic innards, my addiction to alignment.For an hour I forgot my fear of rain.For an hour I was a salamandershimmying through the kelp in search of shore,and under his fingers the notes slid loosefrom my belly in a long jellyrope of eggsthat took root in the mud. And whatwould hatch, I did not know—a lie. A waltz. An apostle of glass.For an hour I stood on two legs and ran. For an hour I panted and galloped.For an hour I was a maple tree,and under the summer of his fingers the notes seeded and winged away 
~~~
“O Love, thou art winged and swift,
   Yet stay with me evermore!”
And I guarded my house with bolt and bar
   Lest Love fly forth at the door.
Without, in the world, ’t was cold,
   While Love and I together
Laughed and sang by my red hearth-fire,
   Nor knew it was winter weather.
Sweet Love would lull me to sleep,
   In his tireless arm caressed;
His shadowing wings and burning eyes
   Like night and stars wrought rest.
And ever the beat of Love’s heart
   As a chime rang at my ear;
And ever Love’s bending, beautiful face
   Covered me close from fear.
Was it long ere I waked alone?
   A snow-drift whitened the floor;
I saw spent ashes upon my hearth
   And Death in my open door.
~~~
Soul, don’t complain, says Senhal,
who means by “soul” a thing like “future,”
possesses without knowing it
not soul, but future,
is little present, Senhal, & less past
when this she shares,
not always willing all,
the pale pearl earth with you
& shelters in her heart
a stunted lemon tree, inviolate,
& shielded by a sour ring of fire,
the kind that keeps a Valkyrie asleep.
Always born too early,
Senhal lights these candles
not to read by, but to watch
the diamonds flower & die
within their hot, blue nuclei,
which seem to flicker
with secret intent
that fails, all told,
to comprehend her.
& arguably, this darkness is, for her, the best
of them, refusal of the soul
she never recognizes
as refusal of the future
which she is
instead of all her otherwises — 
& might she have been — 
conscience-calmed — perhaps — 
or else a bird
of the earthly paradise
in which one barely needs to eat
or else subsists on manna
or some other fragrant zero
denuded of the tang of death
& the numb green shade,
a starry zone,
orthogonal with luminous errata,
in which a lake of ultramarine
has been used with never parsimony
in all the places where blue is required
to smudge a Thule out
of sand & sea & air,
a seeming there
that seeming wants
to hold her in its arms,
in which one could be one
& yes the ripe quicksilver
that the artificer poured
into the throats of statues
to give them voice
had never brought the air alive
with hoarsest cries & muffled pleas
(lutes, lobsters, seas of milk, and ships of amber
did they cry?)
as if nor it nor any thing mercurial had ever learned
to savor love & poison in one mouth?
~~~
This is not a book. Otherwise, by now
We would love each other.
You would not put me first,
Out of a kind habit, under your coat
And clutch—as a sudden rain
Spate down. For I've seen it done
For the hardly known.
No, you would know with a book you love:
How nothing held your eyes
The way the words did, with archer-focus:
How each arrow heading toward you
Was slowed by the dripping beehive
On its spike—
Nothing else could hold what you are
Still: I pressed your heart in speech and saw
What a musical you let rush, nothing
Else in the eyes. This is not a book,
But a streak—
Words cross reins—
The brow splits, veins careen.
~~~
Pomegranates fell from the trees
in our sleep. If we stayed
in the sun too long
there were aloes
to cool the burn.
Henbane for predators
and succulents when the rain was scarce.
 
There was no glorified past
to point the way
true and natural
for the sexes to meet.
He kept looking to the heavens
as if the answer were anywhere
but here. I was so bored
with our goodness
I couldn’t suck the juice
from one more pear.
 
It’s here, I kept telling him,here, rooted in the soil
like every other tree
you know. And I wove us
a bed of its uppermost branches.
~~~
I hold two fingers to my head,
trigger my thumb, I say pow.
I slice my throat with a single stroke,
pull an invisible blade
vertically along my vein.
Remember the deaths we did together?
Twiddling oven knobs in the air
then thrusting our chins to inhale?
I loved you so much
during that experimental play
when you slowly leant forward to nick
your femoral artery then quietly
bled out in your seat until curtain call,
blood only we saw.
As well as death, we’d mime marriage.
I’d slide on a spectral ring
and you’d shiver at the thrill
of my thumb and fingertip
sealing the deal for a second till
the thought melted back into your skin.
I am proficient at beginnings,
the Air Year: the anniversary prior to paper
for which ephemeral gifts are traditional.
Only after our rings became solid
silver did they truly disappear.
Now the house is a mime scene.
Mime blood all over the floor,
trodden into carpet fibers,
shirts, bras, dried to an airy crust
under my nails. I slit
my neck at the traffic lights,
pow on the train, I suspend
my non-knife above my head,
“see what you’re making me do.”
Red whirls rise from the cuts.
All these huge thoughts come to
nothing. My shadow is
the chalk outline of a woman
who did not jump.
~~~
Down the long hall she glistens like a star,The foam-born mother of Love, transfixed to stone,Yet none the less immortal, breathing on.Time's brutal hand hath maimed but could not mar.When first the enthralled enchantress from afarDazzled mine eyes, I saw not her alone,Serenely poised on her world-worshipped throne,As when she guided once her dove-drawn car,—But at her feet a pale, death-stricken Jew,Her life adorer, sobbed farewell to love.Here Heine wept! Here still he weeps anew,Nor ever shall his shadow lift or move,While mourns one ardent heart, one poet-brain,For vanished Hellas and Hebraic pain.
~~~
themes from the Tzu Yeh and the Book of Songs



I have carried my pillow to the windowsill
And try to sleep, with my damp arms crossed upon it,
But no breeze stirs the tepid morning.
Only I stir ... Come, tease me a little!
With such cold passion, so little teasing play,
How long can we endure our life together?
No use. I put on your long dressing-gown;
The untied sash trails over the dusty floor.
I kneel by the window, prop up your shaving mirror
And pluck my eyebrows.
I don’t care if the robe slides open
Revealing a crescent of belly, a tan thigh.
I can accuse that nonexistent breeze ...
I am as monogamous as the North Star,
But I don’t want you to know it. You’d only take advantage.
While you are as fickle as spring sunlight.
All right, sleep! The cat means more to you than I.
I can rouse you, but then you swagger out.
I glimpse you from the window, striding toward the river.
When you return, reeking of fish and beer,
There is salt dew in your hair. Where have you been?
Your clothes weren’t that wrinkled hours ago, when you left.
You couldn’t have loved someone else, after loving me!
I sulk and sigh, dawdling by the window.
Later, when you hold me in your arms
It seems, for a moment, the river ceases flowing.
~~~
i. 
My body a full echo                I dawdle down to the creek
                          Ask the god of blood for
                          Abundance     continuity
                                      My offering      the syrup of pressed beans   &
                                      A 7-winged tulip
 
ii. 
Later the rains swell the creek with coffee            the storm        a beckoned sheet
The immortal herself reaping the earth          the tongues cut out of the cows
 
iii. 
I walk in                       as the wash      attempts its valiant swallow 
             A cafeteria aid             wipes the cotton from the counter
             Her bald eyes              aurora with       seeds
                         You brought that           didn’t you?
 
iv. 
                                                               My bottom lip a pink venom     My desire a valley with
                                                               legs       His steady fingers toying the tea            I look
                                                               up to a straight line and bury it    Can’t downsize what
                                                               hithers me
                                                               Every now & then a troubled thirst
                                                               opens my mouth for a song that does not come
                                                                            I feel it all
                                                                      until a fixed voice decides
                                                                                        No      but wait      you’re the water
~~~
There is an alleywhere you can go,where you can kisssomeone’s mouthuntil you climbinside them, forceyour way in, pushyour cells into their cellsand become onecreature — angelic.It isn’t the wayyou’d dream it.There is piss,dew-damp moss crawlingacross the brick.Some nights it is so darkyou must enter onlyby touch.Walk by in the lightand it will seemlike nothing.The scriptureis written by wenches:4eva, L+ J, I.T.A.L.Y.A heart jagged in two.But what you’ll make thereit’s not love,it’s not weigheddown with that,it’s feather, air,an at-once exultationof being notof this time, this alley,this shittygood for no one,shut-down town.I never went there,I promise you.I never knewsuch sweet violence.Though there are morningsnow, miles from that place,when I wakewith the thought of it:wet and bitten, half-winged.
~~~
Of  that string of memories about our lost friendship I rememberbeing invited places as a pair, like a comedy team; and afterone party, our self-parody of our own stammeringspeechlessness when introduced to Henrik, the Swedish godauto mechanic; our twin, garish, purple-flowered swimsuitsfrom Kmart, outlining, around Texas, our samenessand differences; our dual waitressing shifts across town,and the long phone calls that followed with their emphaticreiteration of every stingy six-top ordering candy-flavoredalcoholic drinks; the after-work visit where we brayed,stomped, then blinked stupidly (while the needle hitthe LP’s end) at the empty fifth of gin left on the coffee table,prompting a dim: Uh oh; your imitation of your mother’shabitual and by-the-way inexplicable confession about youto shoe salesmen: She has a  funny foot; the apartments,the Olivettis, the boyfriends, all the thoughts exchangedunedited like an experiment of the big, walk-in consciousness,which we might have assumed the verbal equivalentof sex for friends, and whatever closeness meant, we wantedas much as we could have, it was our post-graduate workin The Humanities. Even now, I can’t resist striking upa conversation while standing on line, any line, or introducingmyself enthusiastically to whomever I am introduced,but the truth is I am not looking for new friends at this point;I am trying to locate the lost ones, the ones who leftthrough the hole of an argument decades ago,a time more panicked and carefree than any other, except maybethe early years of motherhood, which I missed sharingwith you on playground benches. But surely I will see youon the bus someday, and your greeting will packageour jokes, advice, tears, book talk, our years of reliance.And so I will expect you will tell me how much I havemisunderstood and wrongly assumed in these descriptions,because I never expect those people who have matteredto remain completely gone, even through death, or rebuke.And of course I have to remember what parted us,that I found faults with your other friends, that I spokeas critically and crassly about them as I did about my own person,and to this day I have to be careful of that trait, my junkyarddog of expression, safe only with me on a too-long leash. Here,again, telling you everything with no reason but formemory’s insistence that I string an apology from what I see.
~~~
september is a month like any other and unlike any other. it seems in september everything awaited will arrive: in the calm air, in a particular scent, in the stillness of the quay. when september comes, i know i’m going to lose myself. the ants climbing my legs and a certain change of light tell me so. the air comes and goes beneath my dress, pressing the warm cloth against me, pressing me with the desire to find myself in the sea, that sea beaten deep gray and magnetized by neutrinos, thanks to which i can perform my observations and telekinetic communications. the salty, sticky wall of the Malecón is covered with fish and forgotten hooks. i like to lick its sheen of salt and make my tongue salty and sticky. in that moment the rest of the city can vanish, it’s just that sea and me, before all thought, all desire. then i undress and enter, knowing i’ll find something, and that the boats—which seem suspended on the horizon, seem to have slipped their limits, motionless and painted there—are also mine...when i met you and you met me it was still september and we were strange and different and would be for a long time after—though i sometimes snagged you with certain secret hooks, shaping a sort of formless impression: something strange and indefinable divided the outline of your body from the space around you, but without making a human form, and in your eyes the sunlight revolved like a bicycle’s spoked wheel...the bicycle moves on and i’m carried along, filled with dry branches and coral. in my hair i wear the butterflies we collected together. the little house, one point amid the infinite, comes into view: already we can see the windows, like little black voids, and their curtains beating in the wind. i squeeze your waist, the bicycle moves on; even though the street is narrow the bicycle rolls on, rolls on against the spray. when you turn your head and see my hand, my hook snagged in a struggle of desire, the sun has turned immense in your eyes again. you make for the little house already in view, already at the edge of the curve...a naked man in lamplight is a magnificent animal: his pointy shoulders jut out and cut off the light. a line of fuzz descends from his navel to where the darkness begins, where the skin tightens like the skin of a fig. his body—your body—is an arc i want to tighten, to overcome, to conquer. hidden behind a tree, i can see your eyes again. the Mississippi is a big river with many tributaries. the arc tightens and closes. i throw an arm over you, a leg, a hand, a lip, hallucinations, an ear—as usual. my body moves on. the Mississippi is a big river with many tributaries. its water burns in my thighs, in the course of my dreams: the Mississippi is a deep and torrential river situated in the United States, it is born in Lake Itasca, passes through St. Paul, St. Louis, Memphis, New Orleans, traverses 3,780 kilometers and slides and slides through a wide delta to the Gulf of Mexico. i’m in geography class. i like this class. the world just barely fits in my head. the map hangs before me with its spokes and points. someone made that all up, just to make me think i belong to one of those zones out there. all those castles and fortifications to toy with, the beginnings of everything that seems to be reality, but isn’t, because we’re not outside but inside the globe, that huge globe so stubborn in its sufficiency, and even far from the classroom nothing’s different: there’s just the idea of that transparent globe that is my image of the world, always turning, imperfect and constant inside me. i like the maps and the instability of the geography that situates places in my head. i like using graph paper to plot the latitudes and longitudes i can’t measure. i also like the geography professor, whose eyes i must constantly avoid in order not to drown myself. he doesn’t know, he can’t imagine, that while he lectures, while he looks at me, i draw fish in my notebook to throw in his river. the boy behind me won’t stop looking at me, and whatever one does the others all follow, watching from the corners of their eyes. that’s why i’m going to fold the page away from his gaze and make a true map where he won’t find me, alone at my desk in the middle of the world...in the middle of the lake there’s a boat and we’re three—although the third may have already vanished for us—and i want to paddle and sit in the center. you’ve taken off your shirt: the landscape appears and disappears. when i take the oars you want to teach me how to row over the edge. you try to teach me: you take my hands—you’re behind and above me. my fingers are lost in the middle of the boat. i’m wearing faded jeans and carrying a purple parasol. the oar descends toward the deep and tangles with seaweed. my hair hangs surly and limp on my wet shoulders. we try to steer but go nowhere. you explain the roundness of the earth; the sharpened tip of the compass needle, always precise, marking contours, lines, limits. the shadow and truth of your body in the landscape: appearances and disappearances when you try to comprehend the possible across great distances, the symmetry, forgetfulness, incarnation in other beings: animals, plants, and later, men once again. you taught me all this, but i’m not a map and i hold still. i abandon my shoes and my dread of nearing the end: the oar descends toward the deep, it is september. we don’t move. i keep still to be different, that’s why...
~~~
Large green-tailed lizard, zucchini-mottled
flicks and swirls. But, no! It’s not some random lizard:
that’s the snake! A rill of water falling up the stone,
he’d heard my light, quick foot     as human-hard.
And the dream? that wildly handsome man
who had no wife,     his wife had “gone away”
(but where?)     so he wanted to meet more     women
he needed help    with his decor, his place
was encumbered with little ceramic, clay-
kitsch banalities —      I did not see the snake’s head,
since it faced away.     I could not fix
it being vipera or serpente.
That question hinged on poison in his mix.
From what I saw, though, ’twas a very handsome snake.
                                                                 • Options:“scaled to the human boy” or was it “scaled to the human body”? Which did I write?Options:Desire? temptation? yearning for danger? thralldom? lust? You can add to the list yourself. You can add yourself to the list.Options:Teasing enchantment. “How still the Riddle lies.”Options:Insistent     “Shaft”     “a tighter Breathing”The sibyl’s many leaves are laurel made for wreathing.
~~~
On our first trip to the beach together I cut my foot on sharp rocks lining the shore and watched the ocean lick the crimson clean off, the salt on my tongue a slight distraction from the deep blue, the wide open, the playground sting. I’m sorry my flesh is softer than it has to be, my skin thinner than yours. I’m sorry there are parts of me I have scrubbed raw, hurt; I only wanted to be polished, untainted, good

as new. I’m sorry I didn’t see the waves crashing, didn’t see any of this coming; I’m sorry I wasn’t careful, or strong. When the sea soaked up my blood that day I thought maybe it needed to drink too, needed to kiss, needed to need. I thought maybe you had always been right — when you drain my body of tears you also drain it of salt and dust so that you can shrink me down two sizes smaller and I can fit neatly into your life without taking up too much space, so that you can carry me with you wherever you go, to cities and mountains and valleys and all the oceans

you’ve never explored. Tell me, please, if you find something. Tell me if you need me to search, too. Tell me if there are places you still have to visit, things you still have to unearth. Tell me if there’s any way to love you, deep blue and wide open, soft and scrubbed and thin, flesh and skin, shrinking bones, raw parts, any way at all, without letting myself bleed.
shallow body, 2014 by Caitlin Hazell
~~~
To be a statue               carved by Bernini
Lounging in a climate-controlled museum in Rome         is luxury
Like the luxury of a personal pan pizza            with unlimited free toppings
Or the luxurious feel of a premium eye pencil          used to draw bisons on the walls of a French cave
To be so white and glossy                   is unimaginable
Like how I imagine a plate of eggs painted by Velázquez           or the lid of a designer toilet cistern
In a European magazine                       (I could be European
And wear a dashingly arranged scarf          or sip weirdly-named liqueurs that taste like semen
In a Rococo palais)                but in the scheme of things
Where I am marble and still                  my wrist will be a marvel
Like the marvel of an isthmus           whose name can only be pronounced if you have a lisp
Or the marvelous sausage                that saved a man from the Inquisition in 1582
It is definitely marvelous                    to be as attenuated
As the casually extended leg of a greyhound                   reclining on its very own velvet settee
To be so thoroughbred                          is an accomplishment
Like the thoroughly flattened face of a Persian cat                   which always looks peevish
Or the extremely frivolous ceiling                   of a banqueting hall where royals are put to death
If it is admirable to be so luxurious                    then I will never be admired
The way a designer toilet cistern is admired               or a piece of elaborate pâtisserie
(Although I am not a statue                   I have often held my arms aloft
As when catching a carelessly thrown baby              or pointing at two meteors at the same time)
It is exhausting trying to be so inanimate               and desirable
If my arm breaks off  like the shell                of a freshly-filled cannoli
You will know why
~~~
When I go away from you
The world beats dead
Like a slackened drum.
I call out for you against the jutted stars
And shout into the ridges of the wind.
Streets coming fast,
One after the other,
Wedge you away from me,
And the lamps of the city prick my eyes
So that I can no longer see your face.
Why should I leave you,
To wound myself upon the sharp edges of the night?
 
~~~
Except when once we drew identical lots
nothing’s ever come between us.
We keep our drifts of space
spare and daily shake our down.
You’ve glanced beyond your dirty cuffs
and caught me hand-washing my clean shirts.
Stuck with sharp wind, both
bloods are rare and rarely do
we taste the walnut’s knot of oil.
We wake between our fitted sheets
and shake our fists or pretend real fright
but not in this do we dare touch.
My rib cage can stand in yours, yours
become the swinging doors through which
magician’s swords will slice and miss
that knotted muscle. It is a trick.
We’ll make an endless show of the outright
clanking, irregular beating of our acrobatic hearts.
We’ve designed the double bars of depth;
our hearts skip — the tumbleset we think
is absence, the somersault we call forbearance
— the hearts are there, doing turns that teach
us to count and keep each finger
close to its own sly pulse.
~~~
This song is not a language,
Not a thing to be remembered,
The field-holler tradition of
Teeth and knees
Cursing wind,
A concert hall of   bloody hands
Spilling the earth,
Strangling dirt,
Sledgehammer curses
Of  men busted open.
On Parchman Farm
You could hear it coming
Up through the trees,
The hammering pulpit of
Crooning men and sweat,
The tender meat of palms
Pulped like plums.
Them men gulped down the
Dawn dew air,
Let it catch in their throats,
Broke the sunrise up and
Sang hymns like hexes:Be my woman gal, I’ll beeee your maaaaaaan    ...    
And the killing fields of  Mississippi
Fizzled down to juke joints and
The hothouse music of illegal clubs
With thick women they loved outright and
Played cards with and
Gave bourbon to when their hands
Didn’t hold sorrow like
Pickaxes and the railroad was
Just a railroad,
A way to ride north if  you could
Get your money right.
Redbone gals with rosewater sweat,
When they lifted their knees
Sunflower County was a heaven
They believed in.Stick to the promise, gal, that you maaaaaade meeeeee    ...    
Steady now,
They turned back the clock on
Their hard, hard hands,
Let the memory of fresh linen and
Ladies’ slips like gossamer
Wings, a parade of  plump thighs,
The juju thrust of  furious bones
Spread like grease
Across starched-white sheets,
Midwife them out of ol’ Parchman Farm
And back to the cockfights and gambling,
Back when they had ambition,
Back when they had a sweet woman
To hold, her fat wrists
Soft as butter,
Limp as rain.When she walk, she reel and rock beeeeeehind
Ain’t that enough to make a convict smiiiiiiiiile.
~~~
And auld Robin Forbes hes gien tem a dance,I pat on my speckets to see them aw prance;I thout o’ the days when I was but fifteen,And skipp’d wi’ the best upon Forbes’s green.Of aw things that is I think thout is meast queer,It brings that that’s by-past and sets it down here;I see Willy as plain as I dui this bit leace,When he tuik his cwoat lappet and deeghted his feace.The lasses aw wonder’d what Willy cud seeIn yen that was dark and hard featur’d leyke me;And they wonder’d ay mair when they talk’d o’ my wit,And slily telt Willy that cudn’t be it:But Willy he laugh’d, and he meade me his weyfe,And whea was mair happy thro’ aw his lang leyfe?It’s e’en my great comfort, now Willy is geane,The he offen said— nae place was leyke his awn heame!I mind when I carried my wark to yon steyleWhere Willy was deykin, the time to beguile,He wad fling me a daisy to put i’ my breast,And I hammer’d my noddle to mek out a jest.But merry or grave, Willy often wad tellThere was nin o’ the leave that was leyke my awn sel;And he spak what he thout, for I’d hardly a plackWhen we married, and nobbet ae gown to my back.When the clock had struck eight I expected him heame,And wheyles went to meet him as far as Dumleane;Of aw hours it telt eight was dearest to me,But now when it streykes there’s a tear i’ my ee.O Willy! dear Willy! it never can beThat age, time, or death, can divide thee and me!For that spot on earth that’s aye dearest to me,Is the turf that has cover’d my Willy frae me!
~~~
Why, Damon, why, why, why so pressing?The Heart you beg’s not worth possessing:Each Look, each Word, each Smile’s affected,And inward Charms are quite neglected:
  Then scorn her, scorn her, foolish Swain,
  And sigh no more, no more in vain.Beauty’s worthless, fading, flying;Who would for Trifles think of dying?Who for a Face, a Shape, wou’d languish,And tell the Brooks, and Groves his Anguish,
  Till she, till she thinks fit to prize him,
  And all, and all beside despise him?Fix, fix your Thoughts on what’s inviting,On what will never bear the slighting:Wit and Virtue claim your Duty,They’re much more worth than Gold and Beauty:
  To them, to them, your Heart resign,
  And you’ll no more, no more repine.
~~~
Weeks after ice-out,
last fall’s leaves
make a pathway
to the lake, radiant blue
and still deathly cold.
 
I press my hot forehead
to the window,
smudging it. Blow
and the glass steams.
As if looking at a photo
through parchment,
I’m detached,
the way I saw his body
in the CAT scan
from a foggy distance.
 
I’d like to open the window,
release a wounded bird
nursed to health.
Wiping the glass
with my sleeve
I see white pelicans
wheel and flash in the sky.
~~~
“The orgasm has replaced the cross as the focus of longing and the image of fulfillment.”
—Malcolm Muggeridge, 1966



I.
Hubbie 1 used to get wholly pissed when I made   
myself come. I’m right here!, he’d sputter, blood   
popping to the surface of his fuzzed cheeks,   goddamn it, I’m right here! By that time, I was   
in no mood to discuss the myriad merits of my   
pointer, or to jam the brakes on the express train   
slicing through my blood, It was easier to suffer   
the practiced professorial huff, the hissed invectives   
and the cold old shoulder, liver-dotted, quaking   
with rage. Shall we pause to bless professors and   
codgers and their bellowed, unquestioned ownership   
of things? I was sneaking time with my own body.
I know I signed something over, but it wasn’t that.II.
No matter how I angle this history, it’s weird,
so let’s just say Bringing Up Baby was on the telly   
and suddenly my lips pressing against
the couch cushions felt spectacular and I thought   
wow this is strange, what the hell, I’m 30 years old,   
am I dying down there is this the feel, does the cunt   
go to heaven first, ooh, snapped river, ooh shimmy   
I had never had it never knew, oh i clamored and   
lurched beneath my little succession of boys I cried   
writhed hissed, ooh wee, suffered their flat lapping
and machine-gun diddling their insistent c’mon girl   
c’mon until I memorized the blueprint for drawing   
blood from their shoulders, until there was nothing   
left but the self-satisfied liquidy snore of he who has   
rocked she, he who has made she weep with script.   
But this, oh Cary, gee Katherine, hallelujah Baby,
the fur do fly, all gush and kaboom on the wind.III.
Don’t hate me because I am multiple, hurtling.
As long as there is still skin on the pad of my finger,   
as long as I’m awake, as long as my (new) husband’s   
mouth holds out, I am the spinner, the unbridled,   
the bellowing freak. When I have emptied him,
he leans back, coos, edges me along, keeps wondering   
count. He falls to his knees in front of it, marvels   
at my yelps and carousing spine, stares unflinching   
as I bleed spittle unto the pillows.
He has married a witness.
My body bucks, slave to its selfish engine,
and love is the dim miracle of these little deaths,   
fracturing, speeding for the surface.IV.
We know the record. As it taunts us, we have giggled,   
considered stopwatches, little laboratories. Somewhere   
beneath the suffering clean, swathed in eyes and silver,   
she came 134 times in one hour. I imagine wires holding   
her tight, her throat a rattling window. Searching scrubbed   
places for her name, I find only reams of numbers. I ask   
the quietest of them:V.
Are we God?
~~~
Periyar Nature Preserve




There is no crumbly frozen cake to thaw.
Today, we are in the jungle. I mean mosquito. I mean
 
tigers and elephants sludging their way
to the lake for a drink and Don’t make sudden moves
 
or snakes startled from an afternoon nap
will greet you fang first. I think we are lost. Too hot
 
for any cold confection to survive. Even my tube
of sunblock is as warm as a baby’s bottle. You get
 
to those places I can’t reach, those places I dared
not even whisper before I walked down the aisle
 
in white. You never worried if our families
would clash, if they would clang like the clutch
 
of pale monkeys clanging the thin branches of the treetrops,
begging for our trail mix. You never worried
 
about my relatives staring at your pale, muscled calves—
things not usually seen outside of the bedroom. You wore
 
hiking shorts anyway. And still, they lavished ladle-fuls
of food on your plate. I think we are lost. My eyes are dark
 
and wet as that wild deer that walked right past us,
a little off the trail. I think we are lost, but for once
 
I don't mind. Eventually you turn us back to a place
not on any map, but I know I can trace it back with my finger
 
if we ever need it again. We made it one year
without a compass and we’re not about to start now.
~~~
Thinking to see them there, captains
industrious in
morning sun, I crack the egg’s tender
yellow head
 
Love comes to me un-
­repentant, toward it all vectors
converge repeating, like
 
moment of the necessary form
I pluck a feather from your neck
 
On the page one alights without permission, or
love is
an assemblage
 
beginning each day identical, palpable I
remarks of, is it that music or need edits
my body
 
two people leave a shopping mall
with goods, death squad hovering high
a streetlamp
Call your mother, stay up late
 
to watch the neighborhood
undressing light, like
multiple phone calls
connected then
hung up, get the family together soon, watch
 
American bison overtake the field
filling a vehicle lane in early snow
obstructed I paused
To see it, their dark furs shaking enormous
out of trees they descended from the line of sky
respond to a much deeper instinct
 
we were then back on our way
input later to the search bar
I love keywords, like
love is
an exodus
 
I imagine you sleeping, then a pyramid or
chandelier throwing sunlight
 
An absence emerges, sharp
I regard the whole
practice of it
 
touch it
~~~
A moral tale, for Sauternes, the fungus cenaria, and the wild old



Never prophesy.You can’t. So don’t try.Lust, pride, and lethargymay cause us miseryor bliss.The meanest mistakehas a point to make.Hear this — what his vintner d’Eyquem saidonce the lord d’Eyquem was dead:         “The wine that year promised bad or none.          He’d let it go too late.          Rot had crawled through all the vines,          greasy scum on every cluster          dangling at the crotches of the leaves.          Should have been long picked          but he’d said, ‘No. Wait for me,’          off to wait on a new woman,          grapes on the verge of ripe          when he left. Coupling kept him          till rot wrapped the grapes like lace          & by the time she’d kicked him out          the sun had got them, they hung          shriveled in the blast.          Well, he rode home cocky          & bullied the grapes into the vats          rot & all, spoiled grapes, too old,          too soon squeezed dry.                                                     The wine makes.          The wine makes thick, gold-colored,          & pours like honey.          We try it. Fantastic!         not like honey, punchy,         you’ve never drunk anything like it —          refreshing, in a rush         over a heat that slows your throat —         wanting to keep that flavor         stuck to the edge of your tongue         where your taste is, keep it         like the best bouquet you can remember         of sundown summer & someone coming         to you smiling. The taste has odor         like a new country, so fine         at first you can’t take it in         it’s so strange. It’s beautiful         & believe me you love to go slow.”moral:Age is notall dry rot.It’s never too late.Sweet is your real estate.
~~~
First there was Jim, clamping to my long black hair             that nine-pound Cleopatra wig              with nylon bands and bobbie pins.Meanwhile I was on fire for Chad, who coached me             a bit impatiently Tuesday nights             on my Joan-of-Arc inflection.Then Terence said I’d be perfect for the lounge-singer-             turned-whore, and as it turned out             that was a fairly easy gig.Max signed me on soon after, claiming I was a natural             for Eternally Aggrieved Girl,             which in hindsight hurts me deeply.So by the time you followed me back to the green room             to wait in the hallway—whistling!—             for my scrubbed face to emerge,naturally I was wary, waiting for the script              you never bothered to come up with.             It was damned awkward sitting there,nothing but milkshakes between us. Maybe, I thought,              you’d assumed I was the one with a script.               Finally I decided to give Terence a call.I didn’t like the way you looked at me so steadily             with your chin resting on one fist,             as if the table were a table, the boardsA floor. Listening there as if you meant it,              as if something I could say were true, and every             moment from now on would be my cue.
~~~
Katherine, Katherine, Katherine, Katherine.
Black hair, small cold eyes, whom you loved.
Cock-tease Katherine, chewer of souls.
The door blew open and she blew in, a ghoul.
Black air, small cold wind, taking everything.
Fish-eater Katherine, whose nails dig blood.
I’m going to call her pinch-cunt, pickle-lip,
piss-dribble, shit-smear, goat’s-meat breath.
I want to throw stones at her mother’s corpse,
send her children to name-change foster homes.
May the coat she is wearing burst into flames
and boil the flesh blistering off her bones.
May she be refused in both heaven and hell
and wander the earth forever without rest—
a hungry ghost clinging to the rocks and trees.
~~~
I’m not yet comfortable with the word,
its short clean woosh that sounds like
life. At dinner last night my single girls
said in admonition, “It’s not wife-approved”
about a friend’s upcoming trip. Their
eyes rolled up and over and out their
pretty young heads. Wife, why does it
sound like a job? “I need a wife” the famous
feminist wrote, “a wife that will keep my
clothes clean, ironed, mended, replaced
if need be.” A word that could be made
easily into maid. A wife that does, fixes
soothes, honors, obeys, Housewife,
fishwife, bad wife, good wife, what’s
the word for someone who stares long
into the morning, unable to even fix tea
some days, the kettle steaming over
loud like a train whistle, she who cries
in the mornings, she who tears a hole
in the earth and cannot stop grieving,
the one who wants to love you, but often
isn’t good at even that, the one who
doesn’t want to be diminished
by how much she wants to be yours.
~~~
You’re flush with hearts and I’m forced to fold this hand and swear off another luckless match.How we’ve found ways to love each other, cajoledour cindered hearts, flushed and forced to fold upon themselves like Saint Valentine ensouledwith seizure, skin a whirring bee swarm, a hatched flush of doves. My heart, how I’m forced to fold my hands in prayer for another struck match.
~~~
I think I should have loved you presently,
And given in earnest words I flung in jest;
And lifted honest eyes for you to see,
And caught your hand against my cheek and breast;
And all my pretty follies flung aside
That won you to me, and beneath your gaze,
Naked of reticence and shorn of pride,
Spread like a chart my little wicked ways.
I, that had been to you, had you remained,
But one more waking from a recurrent dream,
Cherish no less the certain stakes I gained,
And walk your memory’s halls, austere, supreme,
A ghost in marble of a girl you knew
Who would have loved you in a day or two.
~~~
 Now that you too must shortly go the way    Which in these bloodshot years uncounted men    Have gone in vanishing armies day by day,    And in their numbers will not come again:     I must not strain the moments of our meeting    Striving for each look, each accent, not to miss,    Or question of our parting and our greeting,    Is this the last of all? is this—or this?      Last sight of all it may be with these eyes,    Last touch, last hearing, since eyes, hands, and ears,    Even serving love, are our mortalities,    And cling to what they own in mortal fears:—   But oh, let end what will, I hold you fast    By immortal love, which has no first or last. 
~~~
“Oh where are you going with your love-locks flowing    On the west wind blowing along this valley track?”  “The downhill path is easy, come with me an it please ye,    We shall escape the uphill by never turning back.” So they two went together in glowing August weather,     The honey-breathing heather lay to their left and right; And dear she was to dote on, her swift feet seemed to float on     The air like soft twin pigeons too sportive to alight. “Oh what is that in heaven where gray cloud-flakes are seven,     Where blackest clouds hang riven just at the rainy skirt?”  “Oh that’s a meteor sent us, a message dumb, portentous,     An undeciphered solemn signal of help or hurt.” “Oh what is that glides quickly where velvet flowers grow thickly,     Their scent comes rich and sickly?”—“A scaled and hooded worm.” “Oh what’s that in the hollow, so pale I quake to follow?”     “Oh that’s a thin dead body which waits the eternal term.” “Turn again, O my sweetest,—turn again, false and fleetest:     This beaten way thou beatest I fear is hell’s own track.” “Nay, too steep for hill-mounting; nay, too late for cost-counting:    This downhill path is easy, but there’s no turning back.”
~~~
 Breakfast Tacos, from the series Seven Days, 2003, by Chuck Ramirez 
Let me be your last meal.
Let me harvest the notes
I took from your mother’s
watery hands, street vendors
in Rome, Ms. Rosie
from our taquería, you:
in the sun, in the open air,
let me give you zucchini
and their elusive blossoms —
my arms, my hands.
Pumpkiny empanadas
of my feet, pulpy as a newborn’s.
Guisada’d loin of my calf
muscle. On a plate white
and crisp as the ocean,
lemoned eyeballs like two
scallops. The red, ripe
plum of my mouth.
Perhaps with coffee,
you’d have the little lobe
of my ear sugared as a wedding
cookie. The skin of my belly,
my best chicharrón, scrambled
with the egg of my brain
for your breakfast tacos.
My lengua like lengua.
Mi pescuezo, el mejor hueso.
Let me be your last meal:
mouthfuls of my never-to-be-digested
face, my immovable femur
caught in your throat
like a fish bone. Let my body be
what could never leave your body.
~~~
Beloved, thou hast brought me many flowers
  Plucked in the garden, all the summer through
  And winter, and it seemed as if they grewIn this close room, nor missed the sun and showers,So, in the like name of that love of ours,
  Take back these thoughts which here unfolded too,
  And which on warm and cold days I withdrewFrom my heart’s ground. Indeed, those beds and bowers
  Be overgrown with bitter weeds and rue,And wait thy weeding; yet here’s eglantine,
  Here’s ivy!— take them, as I used to doThy flowers, and keep them where they shall not pine.
  Instruct thine eyes to keep their colours true,And tell thy soul, their roots are left in mine.
~~~
To keep me from staying out late at night, 
my mother warned of the Hell Pig. Black and full
of hot drool, eyes the color of a lung—it'd follow me
home if I stayed past my curfew. How to tell my friends
to press Pause in the middle of a video, say their good-byes
while I shuffled up the stairs and into my father's waiting
blue car? How to explain this to my dates, whisper
why we could not finish this dance? It's not like the pig
had any special powers or could take a tiny bite
from my leg—only assurances that it was simply
scandal to be followed home. When my date and I
pull into my driveway and dim the lights, we take
care to make all the small noises that get made
in times like these even smaller: squeaks in the seats, 
a slow spin of the radio dial, the silver click of my belt. 
Too late. A single black hair flickers awake the ear
of the dark animal waiting for me at the end of the walk. 
My fumbling of keys and various straps a wild dance
to the door—the pig grunting in tune to each hurried step, each
of his wet breaths puffing into tiny clouds, a small storm brewing. 
~~~
I, being born a woman and distressed
By all the needs and notions of my kind,
Am urged by your propinquity to find
Your person fair, and feel a certain zest
To bear your body’s weight upon my breast:
So subtly is the fume of life designed,
To clarify the pulse and cloud the mind,
And leave me once again undone, possessed.
Think not for this, however, the poor treason
Of my stout blood against my staggering brain,
I shall remember you with love, or season
My scorn with pity,—let me make it plain:
I find this frenzy insufficient reason
For conversation when we meet again.
~~~
for Michael S. Harper



Billie Holiday’s burned voice
had as many shadows as lights,
a mournful candelabra against a sleek piano,
the gardenia her signature under that ruined face.
(Now you’re cooking, drummer to bass,   
magic spoon, magic needle.
Take all day if you have to
with your mirror and your bracelet of song.)
Fact is, the invention of women under siege   
has been to sharpen love in the service of myth.
If you can’t be free, be a mystery.
~~~
You that are dear, O you above the rest! Forgive him his evasive moods and cold; The absence that belied him oft of old, The war upon sad speech, the desperate jest, And pity’s wildest gush but half-confessed, Forgive him! Let your gentle memories hold Some written word once tender and once bold, Or service done shamefacedly at best, Whereby to judge him. All his days he spent, Like one who with an angel wrestled well, O’ermastering Love with show of light disdain; And whatso’er your spirits underwent, He, wounded for you, worked no miracle To make his heart’s allegiance wholly plain.
~~~
This bald year, frozen now in February.
This cold day winging over the ugly
Imperfect horizon line,
So often a teeth line of ten buildings.
A red flag flapping
In the wind. An orange curtain is noon.
It all hurts her eyes. This curtain is so bright.
Here is what is noticeably true: sight.
The face that looks back from the side
Of the butter knife.
A torn-bread awkwardness.
The mind makes its daily pilgrimage
Through riff-raff moments. Then,
Back into the caprice case to dream
In a circle, a pony goes round.
The circle's association: There's a center
To almost everything but never
Any certainty. Nothing is
More malleable than a moment. We were
Only yesterday breathing in a sea.
Some summer sun
Asked us over and over we went. The sand was hot.
We were only yesterday tender hearted
Waiting. To be something.
A spring. And then someone says, Sit down,
We have a heart for you to forget. A mind to suffer
With. So, experience. So, the circus tent.
You, over there, you be the girl
In red sequins on the front of a card selling love.
You, over there, you, in black satin.
You be the Maiden's Mister Death.
 
~~~
And slowly we’m sweethearts
atween the wet grass all river-licked,
lime dust in our hair
and both of us so frightened,
blind as moles. But wanting
something. Wanting.
We’m side-by-side on the grass,
me barefeet in the water,
bowing our heads, gentle
as osses at the water trough.
I can feel his shoulder ashiver
and it makes me bold, makes me jumpy,
so I hold out me ond
till he takes it and kisses the palm
like he’s eating sugar from it
and we’m off ...
~~~
It’s like touching without touching,
except when there is, also, touching.
We pull the bowstrings back
and parallel together,
aiming a handsbreadth higher
than we believe we intend,
and let the glove move where we draw the wire,
scared that the machinery
will misinterpret us,
that we may not stop trembling, that we may lose
our belief in ourselves
before anything is released, or shared, or sent.
And yet we trust the notch to know
the whereabouts of the bow,
and trust the tail or fletching
of each salvo to astonish
the target as soon as it gets there, to make its point
within its nest of Os and Os and Os.
Our belts and buckles try to keep the secrets
we have begun to decide
that, later, we want to expose.
There is the rest of our group, and there is the river,
and that is called the kisser, the stabilizer
on your shoulder. Do what I do. You have time.
Put your hand over my hand. That feels nice.
No longer too young
to participate in this activity, we have become
the elevated counselors
of the air, which will not take
anything but our most forceful advice.
~~~
After “She was the song of my dark hour,” a photograph by Paul Tañedo



I woke up
and I was old—
 
It’s hard to judge
if this new country
 
was worth
its costs—
 
Fil and Eileen
educated themselves—
 
They blessed me
with their happiness—
 
Roy and Glen
lost themselves
 
to a car accident
and something worse
 
(that I will not reveal
even for a poem)—
 
When I see myself
reflected in a mirror
 
I turn away to hide
both my eyes, all of my self—
 
when half of your
children are destroyed
 
the half who flourish
cannot compensate
 
exactly
                        as if
 
a heart breaksexactly down the middle.
 
~~~
you dream in the language of dodging bullets and artillery fire.
new, sexy diagnoses have been added to the lexicon on your behalf
(“charlie don’t surf,” has also been added to the lexicon on your behalf).
in this home that is not our home, we have mutually exiled each
other. i walk down your street in the rain, and i do not call you. i
walk in the opposite direction of where i know to find you. that we
do not speak is louder than bombs.
 
there are times that missing you is a matter of procedure. now is
not one of those times. there are times when missing you hurts. so
it comes to this, vying for geography. there is a prayer stuck in my
throat. douse me in gasoline, my love, and strike a match. let’s see
this prayer ignite to high heaven.
 
~~~
“But there were times when you offered your consent with older men. You chose them, & you were not afraid. Why not?”
You don’t know the true success of survival till you’ve experienced the adrenaline of a too-close death. What is there to fear when you’ve licked the edge? It is going to be an oppressively hot summer, the New York Post says, but I’ve got a few of my own stowed away, enough to occupy a foreign desert.

There was one summer, his name was Tito and my sisters still say his name just like that, “Tee-toww,” the O a benchmark in the bottom of the jaw. I was just 12 but the gaze itself made me a flame, so no one could tell, I guess,

or no one would tell. He was the kind of heavy swelter that had the whole block at mercy, everyone’s connect to whatever they needed, which was much and in bulk. Power is a switch that yokes me up at the waist — I was young & enamored by this pattern of men who shouldn’t want me but would risk day to touch the stark chant of me. Each time, I imagined a witchcraft enveloping the bone. I remember,

once, at some low hour in the trough* of that summer — my mouth a voyaging boat, Tito’s spine a current of illicit knots, his hand a spindle on the back of my coarse head — he looks down at me, & moans out “Who the fuck are you?”

I say, and the answer is always the same thereafter: nobody, who are you?

*Okay, in any event, Elizabeth and I were in the pool, swimming and playing.
~~~
Just as he changes himself, in the end eternity changes him.
—Mallarmé



On the phonograph, the voice
of a woman already dead for three
decades, singing of a man
who could make her do anything.   
On the table, two fragile   
glasses of black wine,
a bottle wrapped in its towel.   
It is that room, the one
we took in every city, it is
as I remember: the bed, a block   
of moonlight and pillows.   
My fingernails, pecks of light   
on your thighs.
The stink of the fire escape.   
The wet butts of cigarettes   
you crushed one after another.   
How I watched the morning come   
as you slept, more my son   
than a man ten years older.   
How my breasts feel, years   
later, the tongues swishing   
in my dress, some yours, some   
left by other men.
Since then, I have always   
wakened first, I have learned   
to leave a bed without being   
seen and have stood
at the washbasins, wiping oil   
and salt from my skin,
staring at the cupped water   
in my two hands.
I have kept everything
you whispered to me then.
I can remember it now as I see you   
again, how much tenderness we could   
wedge between a stairwell   
and a police lock, or as it was,   
as it still is, in the voice
of a woman singing of a man
who could make her do anything.
~~~
spilling water from my back,
you call and i come.
that exhausted walk to reach you
breathless and no i didn’t run
to see you, i’ve been smoking
too much, same thing.
 
another awkward hug in the car
as my face smashes your cheek
that i can feel it leaving now
is the saddest, a beautiful eruption
you could have picked it off the tree
and chowed
 
but you weren’t hungry.
feeling it dying away all day
much worse than the straining
against the leash, another gorgeous
thing that should not have happened,
gone again.
 
~~~
At the hour the streetlights come on, buildings
turn abstract. The Hudson, for a moment, formal.   
We drink bourbon on the terrace and you speak
in the evening voice, weighted deep in the throat.
They plan to harvest oysters, you tell me,
from the harbor by Jersey City, how the waters
will be clean again in twenty years. I imagine nets
burdened with rough shells, the meat dun and sexual.
Below, the river and the high rock
where boys each year jump from bravado
or desperation. The day flares, turns into itself.
And innocently, sideways, the way we always fall
into grace or knowledge, we watched the police
drag the river for a suicide, the third this year.   
The terrible hook, the boy’s frail whiteness.
His face was blank and new as your face
in the morning before the day has worked
its pattern of lines and tensions. A hook
like an iron question and this coming
out of the waters, a flawed pearl—
a memory that wasn’t ours to claim.   
Perhaps, in a bedroom by lamplight,   
a woman waits for this boy. She may riffle drawers
gathering photographs, string, keys to abandoned rooms.
Even now she may be leaving,   
closing the door for some silence. I need
to move next to you. Water sluiced
from the boy’s hair. I need to watch you
light your cigarette, the flickering
of your face in matchlight, as if underwater,
drifting away. I take your cigarette
and drag from it, touch your hand.
Remember that winter of your long fever,   
the winter we understood how fragile
any being together was. The wall sweated   
behind the headboard and you said you felt
the rim where dreams crouch
and every room of the past. It must begin in luxury—
do you think—a break and fall into the glamour
attending each kind of surrender. Water must flood
the mind, as in certain diseases, the walls
between the cells of memory dissolve, blur
into a single stream of voices and faces.   
I don’t know any more about this river or if
it can be cleaned of its tender and broken histories—
a tide of voices. And this is how the dead
rise to us, transformed: wet and singing,   
the tide of voices pearling in our hands.
~~~
When I was fair and young, then favor graced me.
Of many was I sought their mistress for to be.
But I did scorn them all and answered them therefore:
Go, go, go, seek some other where; importune me no more.
How many weeping eyes I made to pine in woe,
How many sighing hearts I have not skill to show,
But I the prouder grew and still this spake therefore:
Go, go, go, seek some other where, importune me no more.
Then spake fair Venus’ son, that proud victorious boy,
Saying: You dainty dame, for that you be so coy,
I will so pluck your plumes as you shall say no more:
Go, go, go, seek some other where, importune me no more.
As soon as he had said, such change grew in my breast
That neither night nor day I could take any rest.
Wherefore I did repent that I had said before:
Go, go, go, seek some other where, importune me no more.
~~~
No, I wasn’t meant to love and be loved.   
If I’d lived longer, I would have waited longer.   
Knowing you are faithless keeps me alive and hungry.   
Knowing you faithful would kill me with joy.   
Delicate are you, and your vows are delicate, too,   
so easily do they break.   
You are a laconic marksman. You leave me   
not dead but perpetually dying.   
I want my friends to heal me, succor me.   
Instead, I get analysis.   
Conflagrations that would make stones drip blood   
are campfires compared to my anguish.   
Two-headed, inescapable anguish!—
Love’s anguish or the anguish of time.   
Another dark, severing, incommunicable night.   
Death would be fine, if I only died once.   
I would have liked a solitary death,   
not this lavish funeral, this grave anyone can visit.   
You are mystical, Ghalib, and, also, you speak beautifully.   
Are you a saint, or just drunk as usual?   
 
~~~
Was it like lifting a veilAnd was the grass treacherous, the green grassDid you think of your own motherWas it like a virusDid the software flickerAnd was this the beginningWas it like thatWas there gas station food and was it a long trip And is there sun thereor drones or punishment or growth Was it a blackoutAnd did you still create me And what was I like on the first day of my life Were we two from the startAnd was our time an entranceor an ending Did we stand in the heated roomDid we look at the paintingDid the snow appear coldWere our feet red with it, with the wet snowAnd then what were our namesDid you love me or did I misunderstandIs it terrible Do you intend to come backDo you hear the world’s keeningWill you stay the night
~~~
All day I tried to distinguish
need from desire. Now, in the dark,
I feel only bitter sadness for us,
the builders, the planers of wood,
because I have been looking
steadily at these elms
and seen the process that creates
the writhing, stationary tree
is torment, and have understood
it will make no forms but twisted forms.
~~~
If I could catch the green lantern of the firefly I could see to write you a letter. 
~~~
You and I thigh deep in Suwannee River then in a bathtub. Spanish moss clogs
the drain and a man carrying a green towel interrupts. We send him away once
more knowing he'll return to watch. We're photographers shooting on location
for Sylvia Plath's upcoming book, Savage Beauty—wrong poet or wrong book,
I know, depending on how you look at it—however, I'm the one who is white
this time, you're darker, maybe Quechua Indian or Spanish, like actor Antonio
Banderas, with very defined stomach muscles and a slick throb of a penis.
Years later I write a book about our affair. They bring me on one of those
daytime talk shows, and before being reunited, we are kept in separate rooms, the
television split screen, green-towel man in the audience. I'm still white, so are you,
both of us middle-aged with freckles and strawberry-blonde hair. Later I'm the
viewer at home thinking, Like hell they'll fall for each other.
~~~
Translation: “I won’t forget.”



my father: sideburns down the length of his face my age now & ripe my age now & alive his husky voice’s crackle like the night’s wind through corn fields of bell-bottoms fields of pomade my mother’s overlarge sunglasses crowded on her face crowded in the only english movie theater that plays amitabh bachchan my mother watching the blown-out screen the smoke spilling from light how he is able to be in all places at once all the places she can’t be the man on the screen a kind of god maybe a kind of god maybe my grief at all places at once replaying their every story a kind of god maybe my father’s nazar his long look his luck-laced lungs breathing my mom’s hands in the theater as they whisper next to my father’s the almost touch blood electric my father watching her his sideways glance on her thick eyelashes so long it’s as if she never blinks my father’s stomach blinks & blinks and a thousand amitabh bachchans blink his insides his heart pumps main na bhoolunga on beat main na bhoolunga in chorus main na bhoolunga the theater singing my mother’s ghost fingers on his palm & maybe this is what falling in love is like: a more handsome man jumbling the intestines a more handsome man belting the song to the woman with the long eyelashes in the theater & you—afraid to blink in case she disappears in case it was smoke this whole time.
~~~
When we gathered at the house, while the men all looked at their shoes and the women whispered, baby, baby, baby, she sat down with a fist full of paper napkins and folded them into birds. When she filled her hands, she crossed the room to the hearth and threw a bird into the flames, then another, then another until she had destroyed all she created. Years later when I asked her what she meant, she couldn’t remember. The worst has already happened, she said. What good is metaphor to us now?
~~~
The last line should strike like a lover’s complaint.
You should never see it coming.
And you should never hear the end of it.
~~~
I
I’ve felt undeserving. I’ve made myself ill with the glory,
in the unleavened garden
disgorged the lies and scared away with a stick a snake.
What made me cover that which I could not have?
I’ve grieved and walked in catacombs,
I’ve felt undeserving. I’ve made myself ill with the glory.
Even the falling leaves gesture their renunciation.
I disgorge the lies and abhor the serpent’s hiss.
I remember seasons, things I bring from far away,
and grieve. I walk in catacombs.
In gardens now, by the stone walls, sunlight closes,
the falling leaves gesture their renunciation.
I remember being in a field touching a man’s body.
I remember seasons, things I bring from far away
and things that hold their breath for shame.
His skin was soft as a girl’s and he closed his eyes.
I placed apple petals on his eyelids;
we were lying in a field and I touched his body.
Then there were clouds, an uncanny silence,
as when in a green place the air holds its breath for shame.
What made me covet what I could not have?
Ill with the power and glory, a thrashing in my chest,
I remember the unleavened gardens,
petals falling singly, the yellow snake disgorging lies.
II
I’ve grieved and walked in catacombs.
I’ve felt undeserving. I’ve made myself ill with the glory,
power and glory--
a thrashing in my rib cage.
I’ve gone into the unleavened spring garden,
disgorged the lies,
and scared away with a stick a snake.
I’ve grieved and walked in catacombs.
What made me cover that which I could not have?
I’ve felt undeserving. In this bright land
that changes from yellow to green and back to yellow,
I remember seasons, things I bring with me from far away
and things that hold their breath as if for shame.
I’ve made myself ill with the power and glory.
I’ve gone into the unleavened garden
and startled a yellow snake
disgorging lies. A thrashing in my rib cage.
What made me cover what I could not have?
I remember   seasons. Things that hold their breath for shame.
Things I bring with me from far away.
III
I’ve made myself ill with the power and glory.
I’ve made myself ill with the power and glory.
~~~
You flinch. Something flickers, not fleeing your face. My
Heart hammers at the ceiling, telling my tongue
To turn it down. Too late. The something climbs, leaps, is
Falling now across us like the prank of an icy, brainy
Lord. I chose the wrong word. I am wrong for not choosing
Merely to smile, to pull you toward me and away from
What you think of as that other me, who wanders lost among ...    
Among whom? The many? The rare? I wish you didn’t care.
I watch you watching her. Her very shadow is a rage
That trashes the rooms of your eyes. Do you claim surprise
At what she wants, the poor girl, pelted with despair,
Who flits from grief to grief? Isn’t it you she seeks? And
If you blame her, know that she blames you for choosing
Not her, but me. Love is never fair. But do we — should we — care?
 
~~~
Identification is a highly important factor in the mechanism of hysterical symptoms; by this means patients are enabled in their symptoms to represent not merely their own experiences, but the experiences of a great number of other persons, and can suffer, as it were, for a whole mass of people, and fill all the parts of a drama by means of their own personalities alone.
— Sigmund Freud



Anne identified with Cate until it became a bona fide
illness, for Boris had left Cate, resulting not only
in psychic estrangement but an unconscious stream
of hostility directed not at Boris, but at his new woman,
Anne, whom Cate viewed as her rival. Cate remained
excessively tender with Boris, though Cate, for him,
had been a “totem animal” from which he gained power
by “eating.” Whereas Boris was the patriarch,
Anne was the ego alien; and whereas Cate was Anne’s
fixation, Anne was no one’s obsession, so she was
admitted to a psychiatric ward with the unbidden
associations she could not be induced to abandon.
On the rare occasions she slept, the manifest and latent
content of her dreams was the dance of abandonment
between Boris and Cate, which Anne, in her waking hours,
projected onto the walls, as though screening a silent film.
She could not be induced to abandon this footage;
she could not be induced to abandon her object love
of Boris (whose own object choice was his
ego-libido); or her identification with Cate, who felt
no friendship towards Anne. Soon Anne drew a mental
triangle on every surface she saw, be it phallic or
concave, and sometimes this triangle was isosceles,
sometimes it was equilateral, and often it was right.
~~~
What lips my lips have kissed, and where, and why,
I have forgotten, and what arms have lain
Under my head till morning; but the rain
Is full of ghosts tonight, that tap and sigh
Upon the glass and listen for reply,
And in my heart there stirs a quiet pain
For unremembered lads that not again
Will turn to me at midnight with a cry.
Thus in the winter stands the lonely tree,
Nor knows what birds have vanished one by one,
Yet knows its boughs more silent than before:
I cannot say what loves have come and gone,
I only know that summer sang in me
A little while, that in me sings no more.
~~~
Because it is a pearly eveningI am sitting in the window readinga book I have read before.Branches emphasizetheir heft and sway over their shadows.Some kind of extra firmament,an ear over the earth's ear,extra, as language is to prayer.Narratives of elsewhere: in the eyeinside my eye that vision makes when you tell it towhen you shut your eyes so hard they hurtyou get more vista and less twistof road, and then you're lookingat a valley you named yourselfand irrigated yourself,full of bitterroot, magnolia in the cleftsof rock, sage, at last a harvest,a desert that belongs to you—The trick to renunciation is starting now.The secret of detachmentis having already given up,a transcript of speech whose cadences are lost,the human need for a body to fill inall your body's deficiencies, those clefts and dentsalready given up, the narrative of a lifecompletely altered in the retrospectthat knowledge brings and so discreditedthe point of memory utterly lost.That piece of land has always beensuitable for a house. That nest has neverbeen ready for eight baby birdswho, top-heavy, frightened their own branchand home and scared themselvescompletely and remarkably away.Do you hear that? It's the wind negotiating the spine of one leaf it cannot decide whether to raise a fragment of an inch.Duncan writes as a readerstruggles with a strong sentence, I struggleat certain unmistakable timeswith what's furtive and most right.When people marry they finish their names.I am still listening for mineto begin. My spinewants a bicycle to order its work, a redbicycle, a hill into a heartof a city that holds something I want.The pattern of the air around that leafis like someone tracing my ribcagewith his index fingerand then walking away.Who can blame us for wanting other worlds,but shall we take them,or let them come to us? Is the spirit just an earmore like a mouththat bites the air and turns it into blood?A voice in the next room goes to sleep.Sleep moves in the branches of the oakbecome a rootless massunsung by skeleton or name or height.My friend who saysshe does not believe in Paradisebelieves in rest: I believe that,or more likely I like to think of her,the way she held my name in her small mouth,as she held her own name. I like to think of anyonewho on a night like thiswould reach towards my ribcageand trace it delicately and walk away.
~~~
1 
 
A pepper of  bees opens the pupils. An ensemble of aromatics Chorus aphrodisia, mariner’s root, bright sky and night star, heavenly rainbow. Amethyst, azure, blue flower-de-luce. Flowering ring.   • 
White archangelic the bee nettle,
the dead nettle. A hide of nettle cloth,
of finely-nerved sedge. Take heed
the edges, the pipes, the passages,
the petal corridor, the corolla tube.
 
• 
A blossom is a throat. Rose oil and hip.
A ripped rose is a voice organ, time-cut
and curt. Royally red and confidence-
keeping, redder than Mars, redder than
hot days and parched, Venus on the lips.
 
2 
 
Muscle rose. Flesh rose. A verge toward red Then rustling redshank rose. Vines ascend the arch of aorta. Mercurial, the climbing nightshade, the bundle-branched bittersweet.  
 

• 
White-spotted hellebore under Jupiter
and wind. Oak lungs, jovial lungs.
Sea rush blows the lungs with sweet rose,
carmine and sanguine, flaming red.
Candleberry fires the blood.
 
• 
Red is antispasmodic, cardiovascular.
Great garden patience of Mars.
May-blossom, hawthorn. Spring
gushes red-veined with sorrel, bloodwort
below Jupiter, red dock for longevity.
 
3 
 
Venus stokes the throatwort. Ringing with wasps The good leaf. The rose noble.  L’herbe du siège slackens the isthmus of the fauces. Gash-red and choking rose.  
 

• 
Double tongue. Bay laurel.
Daphne of the sun.
Yarrow charms wasps,
snuffs the inveterate headache.
Daphne sings the bees from the ears.
 
• 
The voice reeds are a Queen Anne’s lace
of wasps. Mercury abounds with buzz
and wild carrot, jump-starts speech
with hoar-strange words, a gargle
of hog’s fennel and brimstone wort.
 
4 
 
Under Leo, composure. Touchwood and rue Herb of grace. Anti-magical. Vinegar of the four thieves. Poison against poison. Rue before regret. Touch wood Ruta sets the garden free.  
 

• 
Lightning sulfur the garden prone
to primrose and paroxysm. Pellitory-
of-the-wall quells old hacking. An old cough.
A new moon courtesy of wild clary.
Eyebright. Clear eye (en toute bonne foi).
 
• 
Sweep away the broom, the burdock,
the beastly antipathy between ash tree
and adder. Snakeweed. Dragon’s blood.
Devil’s bit. Serpent’s tongue. Wickedness
(a weak moon) licked & licked & licked.
 
5 
 
What a commotion! Wild rocket, a racket Flesh and blood of wake robin, cuckoo point, the clear caroling rise & fall. Volatile dog’s mercury. Dog’s-grass. Dog rose. Hot fits and cold metallic blue. The indecisive indigo.  
 

• 
So the garden bellyaches. So what
the gripes? Rows rife with tormentil,
gallant herb of the sun. Five fingers,
flesh and blood. Stamina, life’s long
thread, root-red, the unhindered heart.
 
• 
Leaves respire and rain returns blood-veined
and blood dock, blood-colored juices. Red poppy
a headache. Heartichoke the downhearted.
Loosestrife calms the fugitive scarlet.
Sweet slumber. The fleshy rootstock.
 
6 
 
Enlist imagination under the banner of science. Erasmus Darwin, Flora attired by the elements. his Botanic Muse Sea lavender, sea holly, sundrops. Jacob’s ladder reaching ether. Wind rose. Sun rose. Water grass.  
 

• 
The loves of the plants. (The economy of vegetation.)Root, pith, lobes, plume, calyx, coral, sap.
Air distributes the seeds of names.
Windflower, digitalis. Tipsy and ethereal.
Trade winds, vital light. Seeds within seeds.
 
• Start from the soil, and win their airy way.
The fifty-seeded heart’s delight, saturnine
and doting wild. Heart’s-ease. Herb constancy.Pensée    ...    An opening. Call-me-to-you. Kiss-her-
in-the-buttery. Meet-me-in-the-entry.
 
7 
 
The yard wants what the yard wants. Rose Bloom of Ruth. Breath of life. Blush. Charisma. Compassion. Imagination. Ebb Tide and Nostalgia. Ground cover and climbers. Floribunda. Abundance.  
 

• 
A hybrid of bruise and steep, petal and dreg.
Lungfuls of lamp flower, rose campion,
rose of heaven. The moon shoulders roseroot,
rosy-colored stonecrop. The neck laced with
French rose, common rose, pomander of roses.
 
• 
At the center of the garden the heart.Red as any rose. Pulsing
balloon vine. Love in a puff.
Heartseed, heart-of-the-earth.
A continuous flow of red.
 
8 
 
Nosebleed, staunchweed, sanguinary. List Thousand-leaved root of yellow. Thousand weed with leaves like feathers. Small birds flirt herb-of-Venus’ tree.  If my love love me, nosebleed and yarrow.  
 

• 
Feverfew-profuse June and July.
Agueweed, sweating-plant,
boneset with yellow thrum.
Venus yields to water.
Boneset breaks the sun.
 
• 
Past mudwalls and molehills,
where the cowslips and the lungs moss,
hedge bells, morning glory and the hundred-leaved
rose, all the livelong organs rose — 
a catalogue, a desire, a wish.
 
9 
 
Chaffweed whups the chin-cough. Life everlasting Venus hiccups dry wind and sandy rows. The garden ruminates cudweed, creeping roots June through September. Pearl-flowered. Eternal flower.  
 

• 
Take flower-gentle.
Take knitbone and knitback.
Ass ear. Blackwort. Slippery root.
Saturn’s orbit comfrey-picked and sea-goat-prickly.
Take sea wrack, knobbed wrack, bladderwrack.
 
• 
Paralysis and palsywort the garden
supplants fool’s parsley with imperatives!Forget-me-not. Forget-me-not. Forget-me-not.
Mouse-ear to the ground. Borage for courage.
Self-heal. All-heal. By crook or by hook-heal.
 
10 
 
 La voilà! Horsetail and paddock-pipes. Viola organista A hurdy-gurdyish drone. Pansy-meek with cattail and fretted tension. (Love-in-idleness.) The over-thinking viola.  
 

• 
Liverwort, liverleaf, liverweed. A low sun
and Jupiter presumes three-lobed hepatica.
Water hectors wind and wind blows sound
into lungwort, bladderwort, kidneywort,
the kidney-leaved sower weed, the hartwort.
 
• Dame de coeur. The crowning heart.
The garden wants it all: leaf, stem, root,
the whole shooting match shoot system,
timbre, pitch, fully chromatic rows,
heart trefoil and arssmart under sun.
~~~
After you left me forever,
I was broken into pieces,
and all the pieces flung into the river.
Then the legs crawled ashore
and aimlessly wandered the dusty cow-track.
They became, for a while, a simple roadside shrine:
A tiny table set up between the thighs
held a dusty candle, weed-and-fieldflower chains
placed reverently there by children and old women.
My knees were hung with tin triangular medals
to cure all forms of hysterical disease.
 
After I died forever in the river,
my torso floated, bloated in the stream,
catching on logs or stones among the eddies.
White water foamed around it, then dislodged it;
after a whirlwind trip, it bumped ashore.
A grizzled old man who scavenged along the banks
had already rescued my arms and put them by,
knowing everything has its uses, sooner or later.
 
When he found my torso, he called it his canoe,
and, using my arms as paddles,
he rowed me up and down the scummy river.
When catfish nibbled my fingers he scooped them up
and blessed his reusable bait.
Clumsy but serviceable, that canoe!
The trail of blood that was its wake
attracted the carp and eels, and the river turtle,
easily landed, dazed by my tasty red.
 
A young lad found my head among the rushes
and placed it on a dry stone.
He carefully combed my hair with a bit of shell
and set small offerings before it
which the birds and rats obligingly stole at night,
so it seemed I ate.
And the breeze wound through my mouth and empty sockets
so my lungs would sigh, and my dead tongue mutter.
Attached to my throat like a sacred necklace
was a circlet of small snails.
Soon the villagers came to consult my oracular head
with its waterweed crown.
Seers found occupation, interpreting sighs,
and their papyrus rolls accumulated.
 
Meanwhile, young boys retrieved my eyes
they used for marbles in a simple game
till somebody’s pretty sister snatched at them
and set them, for luck, in her bridal diadem.
Poor girl! When her future groom caught sight of her,
all eyes, he crossed himself in horror,
and stumbled away in haste
through her dowered meadows.
 
What then of my heart and organs,
my sacred slit
which loved you best of all?
They were caught in a fisherman’s net
and tossed at night into a pen for swine.
But they shone so by moonlight that the sows stampeded,
trampled one another in fear, to get away.
And the fisherman’s wife, who had thirteen living children
and was contemptuous of holy love,
raked the rest of me onto the compost heap.
 
Then in their various places and helpful functions,
the altar, oracle, offal, canoe and oars
learned the wild rumor of your return.
The altar leapt up, and ran to the canoe,
scattering candle grease and wilted grasses.
Arms sprang to their sockets, blind hands with nibbled nails
groped their way, aided by loud lamentation,
to the bed of the bride, snatched up those unlucky eyes
from her discarded veil and diadem,
and rammed them home. Oh, what a bright day it was!
This empty body danced on the riverbank.
Hollow, it called and searched among the fields
for those parts that steamed and simmered in the sun,
and never would have found them.
 
But then your great voice rang out under the skies
my name!—and all those private names
for the parts and places that had loved you best.
And they stirred in their nest of hay and dung.
The distraught old ladies chasing their lost altar,
and the seers pursuing my skull, their lost employment,
and the tumbling boys, who wanted the magic marbles,
and the runaway groom, and the fisherman’s thirteen children
set up such a clamor, with their cries of “Miracle!”
that our two bodies met like a thunderclap
in midday—right at the corner of that wretched field
with its broken fenceposts and startled, skinny cattle.
We fell in a heap on the compost heap
and all our loving parts made love at once,
while the bystanders cheered and prayed and hid their eyes
and then went decently about their business.
 
And here it is, moonlight again; we’ve bathed in the river
and are sweet and wholesome once more.
We kneel side by side in the sand;
we worship each other in whispers.
But the inner parts remember fermenting hay,
the comfortable odor of dung, the animal incense,
and passion, its bloody labor,
its birth and rebirth and decay.
~~~
There's nothing more erotic than one      red Chilean plum slumbered in the brown palm of the curved  hand of the right  man.
~~~
It was a singles cruise but it wasn’t a singles cruise:each participant simulated detachment but nonewas actually single. Some, like the recently widowed,were attached to ghosts. Others were legally attachedto a living person they once but no longer loved.A surprising number loved their partners profoundlywhile fearing said partners inhabited the categoryof those who loved them no longer. These participants,whose fears may or may not have been founded,attempted to self-protect by labeling themselves single.Soon a pattern emerged: those who feared abandonmentdeveloped around them a planetary-like orbitof potential new partners to whom they could not attachbecause they were already attached. Such orbits lasted,sometimes, for years. The orbiters went to self-help groupsand/or analysts and/or wrote letters to advice columnists.Because they could not detach from their objects of unrequitedaffection, they became the predominant clientele for futuresingles cruises, unilaterally sustaining the singles cruise business.
~~~
I want the hole in my ear to be quietAnd inside the hole in my ear to be quietAnd I want it to tell me what to doOr I will go to my lover’s mouthAnd say oh my quietI am comingAnd tell the quiet how its kingdom should be madeThough the quiet has already eaten meBecause the quiet loves meBut does the lover love meAnd why must the quiet be so quietAnd why can’t the quiet have a cockAnd where is its violet mouthIts ten fingers with which to fix meAnd where is its belly breathingAnd O I want to be fixedBut I am already fixedWhy don’t I feel it
~~~
To be born yellow into a household where the black man rules with his fists  and the white
wife  body   livid   with      devotion         hip enough to confuse  trouble
with   love    or   whatever   it  was, such the  lucky  one   to come up so
unamerican   ,   thankful  one   in whose imagination the  country danger is   so ambient 
and precise  of   source   it vanishes    and with each departure  more
affectionate    machines   panting   to run the dream between  hope    and  habit  
 
I wanted to say this more clearly         In what ways  did   watching  your black father beat your
white mother   empower   you   as a brown   baby   ?   in  a blue    way      is  there
anything   so  cruel   so    crude    as  to say   you felt   each   of your hands   in
their  puppet   throats   as they screamed   for
help   in   unison   but  only    one  was   hunted  for   room   within the invisible  listener   Only
one  could  pray  that      far   
 
I wanted to say this more clearly       trustless of a soul  who hadn’t   suffered  he
tore  hers  toward him
 And I arrived as a kind of vengeance, the many versions of war worn raw by their sex, come to
be as the treacherous peace of empty pacts    and broken  chessmen were scattered all over the
room  
 
              It’s like being the last person alive
 
~~~
When you show yourself to the woman you love, you don’t know your fearis not fear, itself. You have never been good,but now you are so good,who are you? Is it the liquidity of her skinthat bathes the world for you,or her face, captured like a she-lionin your own flesh?This summerbed is soft with ring upon ring upon ring of wedding, the kindthat doesn’t clink upon contact, the kindwith no contract,the kind in which the gold is only (only!) light. Cloud covers and lifts, and sleep and night and soon enough, love’sbig fire laughs at a terrible burn, but only (only!) because pain absorbs excess joy and you shouldn’t flaunt your treasures in front of all day’s eyes.
~~~
Didn’t Sappho say her guts clutched up like this?
Before a face suddenly numinous,
her eyes watered, knees melted. Did she lactate   
again, milk brought down by a girl’s kiss?   
It’s documented torrents are unloosed
by such events as recently produced
not the wish, but the need, to consume, in us,   
one pint of Maalox, one of Kaopectate.
My eyes and groin are permanently swollen,   
I’m alternatingly brilliant and witless
—and sleepless: bed is just a swamp to roll in.   
Although I’d cream my jeans touching your breast,   
sweetheart, it isn’t lust; it’s all the rest
of what I want with you that scares me shitless.
~~~
Forbear, bold youth, all’s Heaven here,
 And what you do aver,To others, courtship may appear,
 ’Tis sacriledge to her.She is a publick deity,
 And were’t not very oddShe should depose her self to be
 A pretty household god?First make the sun in private shine,
 And bid the world adieu,That so he may his beams confine
 In complement to you.But if of that you do despair,
 Think how you did amiss,To strive to fix her beams which are
 More bright and large than this.
~~~
by going you have to be and
seek it
out
 
said the starlet in the shared volitional language of space and time
explanation thrashes round the thing but doesn’t touch it
the thing we know then as /style of thrashing/ or
ripples in the pond sufficient
in itself, she licks her tongue, it could be desired as a figure—
 
faithless as a class of examples
i found new objects swimming blankly in a common
sense, by going alone to listen
                                                to them
                         in the night
            light of their pool—
 
                                     to begin with life or stars
                                                              the spring as source or
                                                      season
                                         when to start—i love what you
                        said about the birds
                        as distance is required for attraction
                        & force keeps its distinctions
                        in a tall hull
                        called law—
                        clever in the style of depth in a painting
                        sumptuous for use, and briefly this
                        of fancy, pity, and devising,
                        wherefore as it is at the right door
                        make it language or rejoice
                        this is how you touch me in my other ghosts
                        & short of the occasion
                        just a frequent mist of atoms
                        all touching in the arms
                        like an error in the wish
 
~~~
Why were you born when the snow was falling?You should have come to the cuckoo’s calling,Or when grapes are green in the cluster,Or, at least, when lithe swallows muster
 For their far off flying
 From summer dying.Why did you die when the lambs were cropping?You should have died at the apples’ dropping,When the grasshopper comes to trouble,And the wheat-fields are sodden stubble,
 And all winds go sighing
 For sweet things dying.
~~~
I was the lonely one in whom   they swarmed in the millions.   I was their creature and I   was grateful. I could sleep   when I wanted.   I lived a divided   existence in sleepdreams   that lit up a silence as dreadful   as that of the moon. I have   an overly-precise recall of   those solitary years before   I opened the curtain and drew   upon a universe of want that made   me so strong I could crack   spines of books with one hand.
~~~
Distrust this season breedsin me wholeblue worlds, am secondto leafy nouns,pinned back darkening lipof the night,untrustworthy sidewalk glazedand sleeping there,peachy trees, a line drawn from onebrow of a star downand planted, each pillowlittle shimmer, little wilt startledfrom out the arranging fieldmoonlit pale behindno foxes, in me finding the fragrantnew crisis, not dead stillwhere I love you in feastand pledge, worlds rolling firston crookedlyand on.
~~~
Sleep, love sleep, The night winds sigh, In soft lullaby. The Lark is at rest With the dew on her breast. So close those dear eyes, That borrowed their hue From the heavens so blue, Sleep, love sleep. Sleep, love sleep, The pale moon looks down On the valleys around, The Glow Moth is flying, The South wind is sighing, And I am low lying, With lute deftly strung, To pour out my song, Sleep, love sleep.
~~~
made it to Florida  and then I went for a walk.    The frog pond is half-iced over.  I chucked a stick at it—  still thin. On the white side,    the wind twirled a leaf around    like a prepubescent figure skater  who’s given up her childhood  to get here. Of course, the leaf  was wearing its practice costume  of browns, the whole world    offed of spangles as I am    offed of you. Why    mail snow? Just to show  I could keep it cold  in so much heat.
~~~
   I blush quicker than a school of blue jack mackerel
arranging itself into an orb of dazzle to avoid      
nips and gulps from the dolphins who’ve been silently     trailing them, waiting for them to relax. When I hear      
her growl—her scratch-thirst and giggle when she drops     swear words pressed to wax—I can’t even look him
      in the eye when I ask him to give it a good listen     with me. But he does, ever patient, and we both get
      a light bless of sweat on, a bright address that still maps     us to each other after all this time. When I read him      
the lyrics, the pink of my cheeks is like the pink        of an orchid mantis. Just when you least expect it,
      the pretend flower will reach out and snatch a butterfly     from the air. When I say flower I mean how her song
      blooms in the cicada-electric Mississippi night. When I say      pink I mean nectar I mean a long kiss good and sweet.    
~~~
for John Fogleman




There are some things we just don’t talk about—
Not even in the morning, when we’re waking,
When your calloused fingers tentatively walk
The slope of my waist:
                                         How love’s a rust-worn boat,
Abandoned at the dock—and who could doubt
Waves lick their teeth, eyeing its hull? We’re taking
Our wreckage as a promise, so we don’t talk.
We wet the tired oars, tide drawing us out.
 
We understand there’s nothing to be said.
Both of us know the dangers of this sea,
Warned by the tide-worn driftwood of our pasts—.
But we’ve already strayed from the harbor. We thread
A slow wake though the water—then silently,
We start to row, and will for as long as this lasts.
~~~
Music lives inside my legs.
It’s coming out when I talk.
I’m going to send my valentines
to people you don’t even know.
Oatmeal cookies make my throat gallop.
Grown-ups keep their feet on the ground
when they swing. I hate that.
Look at those 2 o’s with a smash in the middle—
that spells good-bye.
Don’t ever say “purpose” again,
let’s throw the word out.
Don’t talk big to me.
I’m carrying my box of faces.
If I want to change faces I will.
Yesterday faded
but tomorrow’s in boldface.
When I grow up my old names
will live in the house
where we live now.
I’ll come and visit them.
Only one of my eyes is tired.
The other eye and my body aren’t.
Is it true all metal was liquid first?
Does that mean if we bought our car earlier
they could have served it
in a cup?
There’s a stopper in my arm
that’s not going to let me grow any bigger.
I’ll be like this always, small.
And I will be deep water too.
Wait. Just wait. How deep is the river?
Would it cover the tallest man with his hands in the air?
Your head is a souvenir.
When you were in New York I could see you
in real life walking in my mind.
I’ll invite a bee to live in your shoe.
What if you found your shoe
full of honey?
What if the clock said 6:92
instead of 6:30? Would you be scared?
My tongue is the car wash
for the spoon.
Can noodles swim?
My toes are dictionaries.
Do you need any words?
From now on I’ll only drink white milk
on January 26.
What does minus mean?
I never want to minus you.
Just think—no one has ever seen
inside this peanut before!
It is hard being a person.
I do and don’t love you—
isn't that happiness?
~~~
Love's balustrade, love's balcony
             a few iron words that can be seen anywhere still
in grocery lists, in laundry hung between two objects,
             an e-mail, in an apology, in a thought about the weather
these rusty words, these rusting gates
              before a breath, Standing in the cold morning
on a cold blue stairs, with a curlicue of coffee
              you look at the word Love written on the
side of the Pharmacy in cherry-vanilla flavored cursive
              because this is where a love poem once stood,
what I am saying right now is secretly built over
              a love poem, the fossils of a cupola,
pink buildings with red hyphens and dashes
              and three red dots, You, second person pink
with shutters you could open with a fingernail
              like in an advent calendar to see sticker scenes
of apartments inside: a radiator, a bare arm,
              two cups by themselves on a table
The mind of the attic still persists up there
              meditative water
and the chairs talking quietly to one another
              It's now pink rubble, rhyming bricks, and an illicit balcony
the heart had such a fancy elevator
              that it started to look like a bird cage
and once in a lemon-scented fog
               near springtime-fresh trees, I heard two people say,
"Yellow kiss-shaped flowers, telephone flowers,
              are falling from my mouth now"
Now, it's a set of blue and white checkered apartment buildings
              math problems that are eight stories high
a long division jutting as pollution into the sky
              laundry, cooking spills, gasoline shirts
commas, theories or arguments of boyfriends & girlfriends
              boyfriends & boyfriends, girlfriends & girlfriends,
all hanging out of the window that you opened.
 
~~~
• 
Well look, the wedding guests are here again. 
Why not just send a card?
Snapshot. Snapshot. Smile and kiss.
But this bride has such a red face!
Let her scramble past pardon en route to the loo.
Evacuate the taffeta dire and paunchy.
The groom is erect.
The groom downed three pints
and stole from the caterer.
He would never be no grown-up,
This part we'll remember. Dull and easy.
Before the spawning and apathy.
Before the dementia nurse
and waiting for mama to die.
Silverware. Cloth napkins. Carafes. Gather round.
Sit pious and clench yourself.
What's within should be held in.
Choke it down. Medicine for the long haul.
No more wildness is why
I chose no more wildness.
Now scurry ho, before someone else
goes down on the bride.
Isn't that her in the distance, up the pole?
 
• 
By pineapple, by pamplemousse,
we find ourselves
back at the table armed with forks
and particular ideas about what to drink.
Go on, order what you want.
Turn up the music, you.
Lucinda, you have a great voice.
You have a lovelygone face
and teeth. O gums! Pink and alkaline.
We live in the city with crowds of fallen.
Soon I am dead and soon you.
We'll all be dead together! Anne said.
 
• 
Marie, you are not unclean.
You are rose-oiled and shiny
and ensconced in the corner
with the witty anesthesiologist,
inhaling ladysmoke
at the café.
It's a pleasure
just to watch you scratch the crud
off your lotto ticket tonight.
Then in comes Jackson, looking like
he's left his wife. And again Larry
is extending his feelers toward Clarice.
Larry, what gives?
You'll soon lose interest.
Eh, Mr Candlelight?
I want to give you
a good close reading.
Come this way.
 
• 
Oh skin! What a cloth to live in.
We are not at the end of things.
He's tuxedoed and I'm in a cocktail dress.
How gussied up we get.
Drink this, roll that.
Another sender different gender.
We're going to hit a winner.
We're going to swallow vodka
and slap down money
and stand around frocked and gossiping
and bleed a little in the bathroom
from earlier today when we were a little minx.
(He really is of the masses, mama said.)
 
• 
Ladies and gentlemen, introducing
Mr and Mrs of the moment now and dancing.
Mr and Mrs End of Suffering.
Mr and Mrs Safe and Headed Where.
In the reach of night she'll have him. He'll have.
A series of days filled up and emptied.
A welcome closeness and a womb.
He pours her a fizzy one. She pours him hers.
Let's keep on doing this, let's do it
together. A bit of drunk and full of wishing.
(Two people jumping out of a building and holding hands, R said.)
 
~~~
Focus on the taxidermied light,
the quarked vehemence of splayed negation,
to rags, your britches, seeping glib intent,
sight catastrophic, given to seizures.
The curlicue scent has not the mother in it.
The fall of romance, the hold of the tender new,
programs aloft, every nerve to shudder:
ghosting monitions of the incomplete.
Either will the aching swells, apart from bliss.
Coordinates of favor, hip neath fiber strip follicle
sheath of slip chord parent display. Sensitized gift wagon
fern entrenched, the halo of the nation is the caul-throated
blood of hench, rosella’d to the peak of taxonomied childless.
Where your mottled hologram, the feathered monster of the throttled.
Quizzical with the world, am to console, the hope for saplings
edifice disjunction. The dissociated fanfare of motivated loss
entrees the ingredient of dining undertaken. Your teeth the grinder,
your lips the sensitive house. The beds’ laments’ the reindeers’
horses’ dreams’ in halves’ cameo’d sighs.
~~~
The clouds as I see them, rising   
urgently, roseate in the   
mounting of somber power
surging in evening haste over   
roofs and hermetic   
grim walls—
                          Last night
as if death had lit a pale light
in your flesh, your flesh
was cold to my touch, or not cold   
but cool, cooling, as if the last traces   
of warmth were still fading in you.
My thigh burned in cold fear where   
yours touched it.
But I forced to mind my vision of a sky   
close and enclosed, unlike the space in which these clouds move—
a sky of gray mist it appeared—
and how looking intently at it we saw
its gray was not gray but a milky white
in which radiant traces of opal greens,
fiery blues, gleamed, faded, gleamed again,
and how only then, seeing the color in the gray,   
a field sprang into sight, extending
between where we stood and the horizon,
a field of freshest deep spiring grass   
starred with dandelions,
green and gold
gold and green alternating in closewoven   
chords, madrigal field.
Is death’s chill that visited our bed   
other than what it seemed, is it   
a gray to be watched keenly?
Wiping my glasses and leaning westward,   
clearing my mind of the day’s mist and leaning   
into myself to see
the colors of truth
I watch the clouds as I see them   
in pomp advancing, pursuing   
the fallen sun.
~~~
As I am Catholic I have never played. *       *       * I've had thirty-six lovers plus tax. *       *       * I am the most chaste woman in Italian literature. *       *       * I am completely asexual not counting errors and omissions. *       *       * Mount Sinai is sometimes confused with the Mons Veneris. *       *       * No one can know what is between me and God.
~~~
The face of all the world is changed, I think, Since first I heard the footsteps of thy soul Move still, oh, still, beside me, as they stole Betwixt me and the dreadful outer brink Of obvious death, where I, who thought to sink, Was caught up into love, and taught the whole Of life in a new rhythm. The cup of dole God gave for baptism, I am fain to drink, And praise its sweetness, Sweet, with thee anear. The names of country, heaven, are changed away For where thou art or shalt be, there or here; And this ... this lute and song ... loved yesterday, (The singing angels know) are only dear, Because thy name moves right in what they say.
~~~
His superpower was that his testicles manufactured spermwith exclusively X chromosomes & that was ironic becausenot only was he a beast to women but his 40 baby girls grewup seeking men like the father they barely saw unless they wentto his studio to be painted which wasn’t OK with their motherswho were not only jealous but guilty of giving birth to girlswho were products of an X-chromosome-making monster& would soon suffer at the hands of other monsters with X-type sperm thereby assuring the continuation of suffering& meanwhile all the girls became writers who slouchedfrom sitting at desks & being daughters & lovers of beasts.
~~~
“So,” she said, sipping tea from a Chinese oxblood cup,“did anything good happen because of your divorce?”“Well, my emotional palette is wider now. It includescolors like,” I paused... “like that.” I pointed to the cup.                      In southeast Winnemucca                            bypass Route 7 connects                      two segments of Route 2                                   I love you                      and is resigned as Route 2                            although Route 7 is never                      erotically part of Route 2.“Quite a price to pay for a palette. But I heard Munch’sjust went for $750,000 at Sotheby’s in London.”“I heard that too. I think he used a color like oxbloodwhen he painted The Scream. I’m in better shape.”
~~~
She steps into La Roue de la Fortune movie theater
off the Jersey Turnpike, buys a ticket,
and so swiftly the waters roll
above her instinctual visions: Plaza, Il Piazzo,
creep of film over the sound of the wordspiano, purr, whisper across her neck,
one door opens another,
in the labyrinthine pitch to preserve
order, the expulsion from Eden, the dark
soda up her clear plastic straw, reels
of rodents, popcorn, teenage workers,
acne, blood and circulation turn to ice
inside this mechanized paradise,
where reality meets the sound of gardens
growing past their makers’ dreams,
growing strange and outrageous.
She stops to check her phone
and the phone lights up, Putin, Botox,Trump, the garden grows outward, up,
to each side, the ghosts are simply
plants who forgot to stop growing;
they groan, shriek, quake, giggle, gurgle,
stare, and point fingers at the living.I’m glad I’m in love, she thinks.
~~~
Love, thou art best of Human Joys,
  Our chiefest Happiness below;All other Pleasures are but Toys,Musick without Thee is but Noise,
    And Beauty but an empty show.Heav’n , who knew best what Man wou’d move,
  And raise his Thoughts above the Brute;Said, Let him Be, and Let him Love;That must alone his Soul improve,
    Howe’er Philosophers dispute.
~~~
I do not know where either of us can turn Just at first, waking from the sleep of each other. I do not know how we can bear The river struck by the gold plummet of the moon, Or many trees shaken together in the darkness. We shall wish not to be alone And that love were not dispersed and set free— Though you defeat me, And I be heavy upon you. But like earth heaped over the heart Is love grown perfect. Like a shell over the beat of life Is love perfect to the last. So let it be the same Whether we turn to the dark or to the kiss of another; Let us know this for leavetaking, That I may not be heavy upon you, That you may blind me no more. 
~~~
1. brett returns my mother to the wilderness
I slipped them into my friend’s palm — 
the tiny crucifix, and dove,
from off my mother’s pendant watch — 
and I asked her to walk them up through the brush
toward timberline, and find a place
to hurl them, for safekeeping. Now,
she writes, “I walked up the canyon at dusk,
warm, with a touch of fall blowing down the canyon,
came to an outcrop, above a steep
drop — far below, a seasonal
creek, green willows. I stood on a boulder
and held out my hand. I wished your mother all the
love in the world, and I sent the talismans
flying off the cliff. They were so small,
and the wind was blowing, so I never saw or
heard them land.” My mother is where
I cannot find her, she is gone beyond
recall, she lies in her sterling shapes
light as the most weightless bone in the body, her
stirrup bone, which was ground up
and sown into the sea. I do not know
what a soul is, I think of it
as the smallest, the core, civil right. And she
is wild now with it, she touches and is
touched by no one knows — down, or
droppings of a common nighthawk,
root of bird’s foot fern, antenna of
Hairstreak or Echo Azure, or stepped on by the
huge translucent Jerusalem cricket. There was
something deeply right about
the physical elements — atoms, and cells,
and marrow — of my mother’s body,
when I was young, and now her delicate
insignias receive the direct
touch of the sun, and scatter it,
unseen, all over her home.
 
 2. cross and dove  
I had not wanted them, and I hadn’t known
what to do with them, the minuscule
symbols of my mother’s religion,
I looked for a crack in the stone floor of the
cathedral but could not find one. Then I thought
of the wilderness near Desolation,
and asked my friend to carry them up
to a peak of granite, and let the wind take them. Since
then, it has been as if my mother’s
spirit matter has been returned
into the great bank of matter,
as her marrow had been sifted down into
the ocean. It doesn’t matter, now, if I
ever wanted to disassemble
my mother. The sixteenth-of-an-inch-
across cross, and the silver line drawing
of a dove are cached, somewhere, that is nowhere
to be found. Now I think of the nature of metal, and how
long the soul-dolls of her trust will last in their
spider-egg-sac of roots, needles,
quartz, feathers, dust, snow, shed
claw. Her belief she would have an eternal
life was absolute, I think.
It would not be good to think of my mother
without her God — like a hermit howling in the
moonscape of a desert. Once, when she was old — like an
exquisite child playing a crone
in the school play — we talked about heaven.
She wasn’t sure exactly how, but she
knew her father would be there, and her elder
brother, and her second husband —
maybe it was a heaven for four,
the three men and her. It was so
easy to make my mother happy
in her last years, to tell her that I
could just see her, as a kitten, in God’s
lap, being petted. Her eyes sparkled with more
beams than any other eyes I have seen.
I have sent the tokens of her everlasting being
into the high altitude.
They will shine long after I can sing her — sing what I
perceived through the distorted prisms of my vision.
I don’t know if I saw my mother
or did not see her. Day and night,
her charms will gleam in the brush or stream, will
reflect the mountain light in little
pieces of unreadable language.
~~~
Every day a wilderness—no
shade in sight. Beulah
patient among knickknacks,
the solarium a rage
of light, a grainstorm
as her gray cloth brings
dark wood to life.
Under her hand scrolls
and crests gleam
darker still. What
was his name, that
silly boy at the fair with
the rifle booth? And his kiss and
the clear bowl with one bright
fish, rippling
wound!
Not Michael—
something finer. Each dust
stroke a deep breath and
the canary in bloom.
Wavery memory: home
from a dance, the front door
blown open and the parlor
in snow, she rushed
the bowl to the stove, watched
as the locket of ice
dissolved and he
swam free.
That was years before
Father gave her up
with her name, years before
her name grew to mean
Promise, then
Desert-in-Peace.
Long before the shadow and
sun’s accomplice, the tree.
Maurice.November 1981
~~~
I do kind gestures. Remove my appendix.
I put my ear to a flat shell and—nothing.
I play the lottery ironically. Get married.
Have a smear test. I put my ear to the beak
of a dead bird—nothing. I grow wisdom
teeth. Jog. I pick up a toddler’s telephone,
Hello?—No answer. I change a light bulb
on my own. Organize a large party. Hire
a clown. Attend a four-day stonewalling
course. Have a baby. Stop eating Coco Pops.
I put my ear right up to the slack and gaping
bonnet of a daffodil—. Get divorced. Floss.
Describe a younger person’s music taste as
“just noise.” Enjoy perusing a garden center.
Sit in a pub without drinking. I stand at the
lip of a pouting valley—speak to me!
My echo plagiarizes. I land a real love plus
two real cats. I never meet the talking bird
again. Or the yawning hole. The panther
of purple wisps who prowls inside the air.
I change nappies. Donate my eggs. Learn
a profound lesson about sacrifice. Brunch.
No singing floorboards. No vents leaking
scentless instructions. My mission is over.
The world has zipped up her second mouth.
~~~
I am saying primroses lined the pathway of toothless hedges.
I am saying the ocean shimmered like corrugated steel in the
morning sun.
The context of my story changes when you enter. Then I am dung
on the wall of the nomad’﻿s field. Then the everyday waking person.
I am nodding in your direction like fissures between dandelion fur.
Seeing in your manner.
I am speaking your pace. Slippage of silk slippers.
I say you are losing sight. I say your breasts are dry shells.
I am afraid of what I am capable of doing.
This is all a manner of stating how I prepare myself to be loved.﻿
~~~
Love leave to urge, thou know’st thou hast the hand;    ’T’is cowardise, to strive wher none resist:    Pray thee leave off, I yeeld unto thy band;    Doe nott thus, still, in thine owne powre persist,Beehold I yeeld: lett forces bee dismist;    I ame thy subject, conquer’d, bound to stand,    Never thy foe, butt did thy claime assist    Seeking thy due of those who did withstand;Butt now, itt seemes, thou would’st I should thee love;    I doe confess, t’was thy will made mee chuse;    And thy faire showes made mee a lover prove    When I my freedome did, for paine refuse.Yett this Sir God, your boyship I dispise;Your charmes I obay, butt love nott want of eyes.
~~~
I was so thirsty, you cracked
an egg into my mouth. I ate it
& thanked you. We were so
rich then. I imagined the moon,
a being I’d never seen, in every nail
you’d use to tack the tarp
over our heads. I confused
hens clucking for the ringing
of the phone you’d never
let me answer. With a spatula
to my ear, I’d pretend to be
a woman on TV & say:¿Bueno? Your anger
was the gun you kept by the door,
my fear, the knife I used to chop
onions. One night you confused
the sound of a snake rattling
for rain. The snake opened
its jaw & its fangs were the color
of mud. You reached for my thighs
just before you died & I couldn’t
face you. Once you stopped
breathing I rubbed your beard
between my hands
& played the most beautiful
cumbia. We danced
for the first time since our wedding.
~~~
(for E)




               I stop my hand midair.
 
               If I touch her there everything about me will be true.
               The New World discovered without pick or ax.
 
               I will be what Brenda Jones was stoned for in 1969.
               I saw it as a girl but didn’t know I was taking in myself.
 
               My hand remembers, treading the watery room,
               just behind the rose-veiled eyes of memory.
 
Alone in the yard tucked beneath the hood of her car,
lucky clover all about her feet, green tea-sweet necklace
for her mud-pie crusty work boots.
 
She fends off their spit & words with silent two-handed
twists & turns of her socket wrench. A hurl of sticks &
stones and only me to whisper for her, from sidewalk far,
 break my bones. A grown woman in grease-pocket overalls
inside her own sexy transmission despite the crowding of
hurled red hots. Beneath the hood of her candy-apple Camaro: 
souped, shiny, low to the ground. 
               The stars over the Atlantic are dangling
               salt crystals. The room at the Seashell Inn is
               $20 a night; special winter off-season rate.
               No one else here but us and the night clerk,
               five floors below, alone with his cherished
               stack of Spiderman. My lips are red snails
               in a primal search for every constellation
               hiding in the sky of your body. My hand
               waits for permission, for my life to agree
               to be changed, forever. Can Captain Night
               Clerk hear my fingers tambourining you
               there on the moon? Won’t he soon climb
               the stairs and bam! on the hood of this car?
               You are a woman with film reels for eyes.
               Years of long talking have brought us to the
               land of the body. Our skin is one endless
               prayer bead of brown. If my hand ever lands,
               I will fly past dreaming Australian Aborigines.
               The old claw hammer and monkey wrench
               that flew at Brenda Jones will fly across the
               yard of ocean at me. A grease rag will be
               thrust into my painter’s pants against my
               will. I will never be able to wash or peel
               any of this away. Before the night is over
               someone I do not know will want the keys
               to my ’55 silver Thunderbird. He will chase
               me down the street. A gaggle of spooked
               hens will fly up in my grandmother’s yard,
               never to lay another egg, just as I am jump-
               ed, kneed, pulled finally to the high ground
               of sweet clover.
~~~
Now that I have your face by heart, I look   
Less at its features than its darkening frame   
Where quince and melon, yellow as young flame,   
Lie with quilled dahlias and the shepherd’s crook.   
Beyond, a garden. There, in insolent ease
The lead and marble figures watch the show   
Of yet another summer loath to go
Although the scythes hang in the apple trees.
Now that I have your face by heart, I look.
Now that I have your voice by heart, I read   
In the black chords upon a dulling page   
Music that is not meant for music’s cage,
Whose emblems mix with words that shake and bleed.   
The staves are shuttled over with a stark   
Unprinted silence. In a double dream   
I must spell out the storm, the running stream.   
The beat’s too swift. The notes shift in the dark.
Now that I have your voice by heart, I read.
Now that I have your heart by heart, I see
The wharves with their great ships and architraves;   
The rigging and the cargo and the slaves
On a strange beach under a broken sky.
O not departure, but a voyage done!
The bales stand on the stone; the anchor weeps
Its red rust downward, and the long vine creeps   
Beside the salt herb, in the lengthening sun.
Now that I have your heart by heart, I see.
~~~
Gone to seed, ailanthus, the poverty
   tree. Take a phrase, then
fracture it, the pods’ gaudy nectarine shades
      ripening to parrots taking flight, all crest
and tail feathers.
                           A musical idea.
                                                 Macaws
   scarlet and violet,
                               tangerine as a song
the hue of sunset where my street becomes water
and down shore this phantom city skyline’s
   mere hazy silhouette. The alto’s
liquid geometry weaves a way of thinking,
      a way of breaking
synchronistic
                     through time
                                        so the girl
   on the comer
                      has the bones of my face,
the old photos, beneath the Kansas City hat,
black fedora lifting hair off my neck
   cooling the sweat of a night-long tidal
pull from bar to bar the night we went
       to find Bird’s grave. Eric’s chartreuse
perfume. That
                   poured-on dress
                                          I lived days
and nights inside,
                           made love
and slept in, a mesh and slur of zipper
down the back. Women smoked the boulevards
   with gardenias after-hours, asphalt shower-
slick, ozone charging air with sixteenth
      notes, that endless convertible ride to find
the grave
               whose sleep and melody   
                                                 wept neglect
enough to torch us
                            for a while
through snare-sweep of broom on pavement,
the rumpled musk of lover’s sheets, charred
   cornices topping crosstown gutted buildings.   
Torches us still—cat screech, matte blue steel
      of pistol stroked across the victim’s cheek
where fleet shoes
                           jazz this dark
                                                 and peeling
block, that one.
                        Vine Street, Olive.
We had the music, but not the pyrotechnics—
rhinestone straps lashing my shoes, heels sinking
   through earth and Eric in casual drag,
mocha cheekbones rouged, that flawless
      plummy mouth. A style for moving,
heel tap and
                  lighter flick,
                                       lion moan
of buses pulling away
                               through the static
brilliant fizz of taffeta on nyloned thighs.
Light mist, etherous, rinsed our faces
   and what happens when
you touch a finger to the cold stone
      that jazz and death played
down to?
            Phrases.
                        Take it all
   and break forever—
                              a man
with gleaming sax, an open sill in summertime,
and the fire-escape’s iron zigzag tumbles
   crazy notes to a girl cooling her knees,
wearing one of those dresses no one wears
      anymore, darts and spaghetti straps, glitzy
fabrics foaming
                        an iron bedstead.
                                                 The horn’s
alarm, then fluid brass chromatics.
                                                    Extravagant
ailanthus, the courtyard’s poverty tree is spike
and wing, slate-blue
                               mourning dove,
                                                      sudden cardinal flame.If you don’t live it, it won’t come out your horn.
~~~
Remember when you love, from that same hour Your peace you put into your lover’s power; From that same hour from him you laws receive, And as he shall ordain, you joy, or grieve, Hope, fear, laugh, weep; Reason aloof does stand, Disabled both to act, and to command. Oh cruel fetters! rather wish to feel On your soft limbs, the galling weight of steel; Rather to bloody wounds oppose your breast. No ill, by which the body can be pressed You will so sensible a torment find As shackles on your captived mind. The mind from heaven its high descent did draw, And brooks uneasily any other law Than what from Reason dictated shall be. Reason, a kind of innate deity, Which only can adapt to ev’ry soul A yoke so fit and light, that the control All liberty excels; so sweet a sway, The same ’tis to be happy, and obey; Commands so wise, and with rewards so dressed, That the according soul replies “I’m blessed.” 
~~~
Don't bring haw into the house at night or in any month with a red fruit in season or when starlings bank against the light, don't bring haw in. Don't give me reason to think you have hidden haw about you. Tucked in secret, may its thorn thwart you. Plucked in blossom, powdered by your thumb, I will smell it for the hum of haw is long, its hold is low and lilting. If you bring haw in, I will know you want me gone to the fairies and their jilting. I will know you want me buried in the deep green field   where god knows what is rotting.
~~~
The same to me are sombre days and gay.       Though joyous dawns the rosy morn, and bright, Because my dearest love is gone away       Within my heart is melancholy night. My heart beats low in loneliness, despite       That riotous Summer holds the earth in sway. In cerements my spirit is bedight;       The same to me are sombre days and gay. Though breezes in the rippling grasses play,       And waves dash high and far in glorious might, I thrill no longer to the sparkling day,       Though joyous dawns the rosy morn, and bright. Ungraceful seems to me the swallow's flight;       As well might Heaven's blue be sullen gray; My soul discerns no beauty in their sight       Because my dearest love is gone away. Let roses fling afar their crimson spray,       And virgin daisies splash the fields with white, Let bloom the poppy hotly as it may,       Within my heart is melancholy night. And this, oh love, my pitiable plight       Whenever from my circling arms you stray; This little world of mine has lost its light ...       I hope to God, my dear, that you can say                                        The same to me. 
~~~
Lightning hits the roof,
shoves the knife, darkness,
deep in the walls.
They bleed light all over us
and your face, the fan, folds up,
so I won’t see how afraid
to be with me you are.
We don’t mix, even in bed,
where we keep ending up.
There’s no need to hide it:
you’re snow, I’m coal,
I’ve got the scars to prove it.
But open your mouth,
I’ll give you a taste of black
you won’t forget.
For a while, I’ll let it make you strong,
make your heart lion,
then I’ll take it back.
~~~
I’ll fly off to a fjord in Norway,post “Oh the pain” above my doorwayif you insist on going your way,           for this is not a duck.That is what cowards say, and realistswho run away, shun the appeal itsrare white fur holds, although they feel it’s           a rabbit full of pluck.Let’s multiply, let’s twitch our noses,let’s walk among the night’s dark roses,though where the oldest story goes is           a place where tongues might cluck.I’ve had my share of quacks and hisses;whereof mouth cannot speak, it kisses;hop to it, man, and realize this is           a lovely bit of luck.
~~~
What is desire
But the hardwire argument given
To the mind’s unstoppable mouth.
Inside the braincase, it’s I
Want that fills every blank. And then the hand
Reaches for the pleasure
The plastic snake offers. Someone says, Yes,
It will all be fine in some future soon.
Definitely. I’ve conjured a body
In the chair before me. Be yourself, I tell it.
Here memory makes you
Unchangeable: that shirt, those summer pants.
That beautiful face.
That tragic beautiful mind.
That mind’s ravenous mouth
That told you, This isn’t poison
At all but just what the machine needs. And then,
The mouth closes on its hunger.
The heart stops.
~~~
This is what it's like:you sit in the white roomsingular, knees togetherarms over your headto break the noise from the radiothat is false as a drunk's promiseto loan you his car next week.Of course next week never comeslies continue, nobody disbelieves thembut some are ready for the real storythe young man involved breaks her tired heartit's the usual: spilt liquor,broken dishes, wrecked cars.
~~~
Ours was a play-filled childhood; irrigation ditches ran deep
during the summers. We played in the water and dirt, then inscribed
ABCs and numbers onto the smooth ground. Our cat Polly died
of rabies; then all the pets had to be shot, some in the rib cage
as they thrashed in panic. There was a pink bruise
on my forehead from pressing against the wall. We couldn't figure
 
out how such a thing could happen. The dogs were steadfast figures
around the farm. They chased strange cars and sometimes invoked deep
panic among visitors and passersby. They had cuts and bruises
from scuffles with roaming packs. No tags were inscribed
with their random Navajo names. Snazzy was skinny; his rib cage
obvious through thin fur. He looked as if he might die
 
from hunger, but he ate like nobody's business. Who knew he would die
of rabies with the rest? The main thing was to figure
out how they contracted it, my parents said. We cried until our rib cages
ached; our eyes stayed swollen. This first loss was too deep
to even talk about. Decades later, I can finally describe
how that summer led us into a grief that felt like a bruise
 
that would last forever. But our neighbor suffered worse bruises:
their huge dog, named Dog, was the first to die
and was the cause of all this. Their home and fields are inscribed
in our memories as "the rabies place." Over time, they must have figured
it was too much to live down. Childhood losses run deep,
even though we are grandparents now. The memory is an invisible cage
 
of anguished sobs, gunshots, yelping howls, canine rib cages
exploding. Sometimes we reminisce and notice that the bruises
of grief have turned pale like smoothed-over scars. That initial deep
hurt was the start, we found, of how love could die
right before us, even as we watched: stunned figures
pleading for mercy, urgent prayers saying, "Let God's scribe
 
mark this down. We've paid our dues. Our hearts are inscribed
with loss after loss." For some reason, after everything, our rib cages
held up and continued to cradle tender hearts. They must have figured
that all the prayers and careful teachings would prevent bruises
that would weaken us. Our love for those homely animals was deep
 
and would figure in the knowledge that such bruises
aren't endless, and that our rib cages are not mere bones. One can die
from grief, so now we can describe loss and love as the Holy Twins.
~~~
Didn’t I stand there once,  white-knuckled, gripping the just-lit taper,  swearing I’d never go back?  And hadn’t you kissed the rain from my mouth?  And weren’t we gentle and awed and afraid,  knowing we’d stepped from the room of desire  into the further room of love?  And wasn’t it sacred, the sweetness  we licked from each other’s hands?  And were we not lovely, then, were we not  as lovely as thunder, and damp grass, and flame?
~~~
Purple as tulips in May, mauve
into lush velvet, purple
as the stain blackberries leave
on the lips, on the hands,
the purple of ripe grapes
sunlit and warm as flesh.
Every day I will give you a color,
like a new flower in a bud vase
on your desk. Every day
I will paint you, as women
color each other with henna
on hands and on feet.
Red as henna, as cinnamon,
as coals after the fire is banked,
the cardinal in the feeder,
the roses tumbling on the arbor
their weight bending the wood
the red of the syrup I make from petals.
Orange as the perfumed fruit
hanging their globes on the glossy tree,
orange as pumpkins in the field,
orange as butterflyweed and the monarchs
who come to eat it, orange as my
cat running lithe through the high grass.
Yellow as a goat’s wise and wicked eyes,
yellow as a hill of daffodils,
yellow as dandelions by the highway,
yellow as butter and egg yolks,
yellow as a school bus stopping you,
yellow as a slicker in a downpour.
Here is my bouquet, here is a sing
song of all the things you make
me think of, here is oblique
praise for the height and depth
of you and the width too.
Here is my box of new crayons at your feet.
Green as mint jelly, green
as a frog on a lily pad twanging,
the green of cos lettuce upright
about to bolt into opulent towers,
green as Grand Chartreuse in a clear
glass, green as wine bottles.
Blue as cornflowers, delphiniums,
bachelors’ buttons. Blue as Roquefort,
blue as Saga. Blue as still water.
Blue as the eyes of a Siamese cat.
Blue as shadows on new snow, as a spring
azure sipping from a puddle on the blacktop.
Cobalt as the midnight sky
when day has gone without a trace
and we lie in each other’s arms
eyes shut and fingers open
and all the colors of the world
pass through our bodies like strings of fire.
~~~
Left a hole on fire agony or was it the sun
on the banks and near duets?
Eagles with the white wine of the sun
clink and spill, tall
grass over head and heels
. . . Space of hell: shy, inscribed already
but alone— I think I can be that
again, a new hole in the ongoing flute.
In a leap, the country glows— to hone
the fate that wonder exacts,
to go netted through that much,
so heavy as paperweights angels land
square on chaparral nerves.
And since names must give in spades,
out of sorts like these, your reactions
may swell great fountain lips—
a promise that a wish will purge
or pennies caravan the safe
return hearts cross.
~~~
Sir, I am not a bird of prey:
a Lady does not seize the day.
I trust that brief Time will unfold
our youth, before he makes us old.
How could we two write lines of rhyme
were we not fond of numbered Time
and grateful to the vast and sweet
trials his days will make us meet?
The Grave's not just the body's curse;
no skeleton can pen a verse!
So while this numbered World we see,
let's sweeten Time with poetry,
and Time, in turn, may sweeten Love
and give us time our love to prove.
You've praised my eyes, forehead, breast:
you've all our lives to praise the rest.
~~~
Take any desired height, or place points for
top of head and heels. Divide into eights. . . .
 



8.  Head tilted back between the headboard slats. Eyes glass boxes
     filling up with light. Later, drained to a blue-gray, the color of
     good government.
 
7.  Thus, we see that commodification is a function of local necessity.
     a.  As Angelenos collect percolating shade in shallow pans, to
          leach the arsenic out of the light.
     b.  “And then I buried it.”
          “Where, exactly? And when?”
          “In the chest. Insertion point at the base of the throat. You
          were still asleep.”
          “But what is it, exactly? I mean, I can’t figure out its precise
          extent. I mean, I can feel it there sometimes, like stitches, or
          sometimes like a flanged or branching bone.”
 
6.  Cross-hatchings of street noise and the Minotaur with his boy’s
     body. Narrowing. Rib cage the verge of a canoe. Armpit a whiff of
     pencil lead.
 
5.  “If you want to fuck me with that bottle, Mr. Arbuckle, best take
     the foil off first.”
 
4.  osculation:
     a.  The act of kissing. A kiss.
     b.  Math. A point where two branches of a curve have a common
          tangent and extend in both directions of the tangent.
     c.  To the ankles. Or to the knees. Or just unzipped enough.
 
3.  Charmeuse chemise. A shuddering fall. Miss Adelaide Hall on
     the chaise longue singing I ain’t much caring / Just where I will     end. Then jerked upright, skirt hiked to the knee, that bridge
     stretching out under every skip-step. Slaphappy scat-puppet of
     the fixed smile, the meanwhile, Ain’t got nobody to love now.
 
2.  The bone begging bowl. The foot that pushed it away.
 
1.  “I want to leave you exactly as I found you.”
~~~
I Google myself I want you to love me When I feel down I want you to Google me I search myself I want you to find me I Google myself I want you to remind me 
~~~
Before the war leaned in and blew out
the candles, there were many long days
where lovers called themselves lovers
and a house was a dream but also
four walls, a roof. A father called
to his daughter to see the monarch butterflies,
pausing in their migration to fan the goldenrod,
a tiger in each coy disclosure.
A young man reached for a blackberry
and found draped on a branch a green snake
the color of matcha. A snake the color of matcha
sighed in the sun. People drove in cars.
There were jobs and someone had to work
every morning. A man quit his job
but it was no tragedy. He didn’t like the work.
Another man slid in and found it comfortable
enough, and just as easily slid in beside
the man’s wife and into the everyday rhythms
of his life and that was no tragedy either.
After rains, a ring of mushrooms would delicately
crack the earth. Spanish moss harbored red mites.
The sky wasn’t interesting. No one looked up.
~~~
In art, politics, school, church, business, love
 or marriage—in a piece of work or in a career—
strongly spent is synonymous with kept. 
                                                              —Robert Frost



She taught me the names of flowers: calendula, ranunculus, Iceland
poppy. And the medicinal uses of herbs: Fenugreek opens up a
stuffy head; goldenseal lubricates the cracked mucous membranes.
Over a circa 1820 American dropleaf table, she told me asparagus
was the broom of the kidneys. I hadn't understood at first and
thought she'd used a German word I pictured as brüm and not as the
little stalks standing on their heads, sweeping out the impurities. I
learned to make the perfect roux for soufflé and became her
efficient assistant in the kitchen—dicing and chopping, she once
told me, with unparalleled patience. Then one day she began to
accidentally break my Depression glassware, and I recalled how
she'd giggled when she told me that in two years of marriage she
had single-handedly decimated her husband's glass collection
dating from 1790 to 1810, including a rare wedding goblet. In the
doorway to the back porch she stated simply that my presence
made her feel strangled, it was nothing I was doing or could do. We
saw a therapist for six years, while my collection dwindled then
became memory. With unparalleled patience I jumped through
hoop after burning hoop, the therapist pointed out, but I heard that
as praise for my prowess and continued to balance Bauer plates on
my nose on command; hold growling tigers off with Windsor dining
room chairs; juggle career, job, hope, and nightly tempests with
unparalleled dexterity. I could reassemble anything: shattered pictures
of us crossing the street with canes in the future, my hand under her
elbow. My heart. But what I lacked, I can see now, was the ability
to dissemble. Finally, she brought home a Cuisinart food processor,
and I started hearing the minutes slicing away with ferocious velocity,
time doing its soft-shoe faster and faster like Fred Astaire on
amphetamines. Memories of flowers and herbs were sacrificed to
the angry god of its vortex. Your voice is like acid on my skin, she
said after twelve years, then grabbed her Cuisinart and left me
behind like so much history.
~~~
What if we got outside ourselves and there   
really was an outside out there, not just   
our insides turned inside out? What if there   
really were a you beyond me, not just   
the waves off my own fire, like those waves off   
the backyard grill you can see the next yard through,   
though not well -- just enough to know that off   
to the right belongs to someone else, not you.   
What if, when we said I love you, there were   
a you to love as there is a yard beyond   
to walk past the grill and get to? To endure   
the endless walk through the self, knowing through a bond   
that has no basis (for ourselves are all we know)   
is altruism: not giving, but coming to know   
someone is there through the wavy vision   
of the self's heat, love become a decision.
~~~
Whatever it may be, we may suppose it is not love, for love must leave its trace like contraband seized and displayed in rows; is not sufficient reason to erase the careful lives we have so far lived through— there is no call for us to undermine the walls we've built; no need to think anew of all the chains and choices that define us still. And yet for all our fine intent a single touch ignites the night and tries resolve past all resisting. What we meant before we mean again; fidelities have yet been known to shift and come undone and all good reasons fail us, one by one.
~~~
What thou lov’st well shall not be reft from thee;  
What thou lov’st well is thy true heritage.        
          Ezra Pound



You’ll find labels describing what is gone:
an empress’s bones, a stolen painting
 
of a man in a feathered helmet
holding a flag-draped spear.
 
A vellum gospel, hidden somewhere long ago
forgotten, would have sat on that pedestal;
 
this glass cabinet could have kept the first
salts carried back from the Levant.
 
To help us comprehend the magnitude
of absence, huge rooms
 
lie empty of their wonders—the Colossus,
Babylon’s Hanging Gardens and
 
in this gallery, empty shelves enough to hold
all the scrolls of Alexandria.
 
My love, I’ve petitioned the curator
who has acquired an empty chest
 
representing all the poems you will
now never write. It will be kept with others
 
in the poet’s gallery. Next door,
a vacant room echoes with the spill
 
of jewels buried by a pirate who died
before disclosing their whereabouts.
 
I hope you don’t mind, but I have kept
a few of your pieces
 
for my private collection. I think
you know the ones I mean.
~~~
Come, the wind may never againBlow as now it blows for us;And the stars may never again shine as now they shine;Long before October returns,Seas of blood will have parted us;And you must crush the love in your heart, and I the love in mine!
~~~
You give me flowers resembling Chinese lanterns.
 
You give me hale, for yellow. You give me vex.
 
You give me lemons softened in brine and you give me cuttlefish ink.
You give me all 463 stairs of Brunelleschi’s dome.
 
You give me seduction and you let me give it back to you.
You give me you.
 
You give me an apartment full of morning smells—toasted bagel and black
coffee and the freckled lilies in the vase on the windowsill.
You give me 24-across.
 
You give me flowers resembling moths’ wings.
 
You give me the first bird of morning alighting on a wire.
You give me the sidewalk café with plastic furniture and the boys
with their feet on the chairs.
You give me the swoop of homemade kites in the park on Sunday.
You give me afternoon-colored beer with lemons in it.
 
You give me D.H. Lawrence,
and he gives me pomegranates and sorb-apples.
 
You give me the loose tooth of California, the broken jaw of New York City.
You give me the blue sky of Wyoming, and the blue wind through it.
 
You give me an ancient city where the language is a secret
everyone is keeping.
 
You give me a t-shirt that says all you gave me was this t-shirt.
You give me pictures with yourself cut out.
 
You give me lime blossoms, but not for what they symbolize.
 
You give me yes. You give me no.
 
You give me midnight apples in a car with the windows down.
You give me the flashbulbs of an electrical storm.
You give me thunder and the suddenly green underbellies of clouds.
 
You give me the careening of trains.
You give me the scent of bruised mint.
 
You give me the smell of black hair, of blond hair.
 
You give me Apollo and Daphne, Pan and Syrinx.
You give me Echo.
 
You give me hyacinths and narcissus. You give me foxgloves
and soft fists of peony.
 
You give me the filthy carpet of an East Village apartment.
You give me seeming not to notice.
 
You give me an unfinished argument, begun on the Manhattan-bound F train.
 
You give me paintings of women with their eyes closed.
You give me grief, and how to grieve.
~~~
Beside a spreading elm, from whose high boughs Like knotted tufts the crow’s light dwelling shows, Where screened from northern blasts, and winter-proof, Snug stands the parson’s barn with thatched roof; At chaff-strewed door where, in the morning ray, The gilded motes in mazy circles play, And sleepy Comrade in the sun is laid, More grateful to the cur than neighbouring shade. In snowy shirt unbraced, brown Robin stood, And leant upon his flail in thoughtful mood: His full round cheek where deeper flushes glow, The dewy drops which glisten on his brow; His dark cropped pate that erst at church or fair, So smooth and silky, showed his morning’s care, Which, all uncouth in matted locks combined, Now, ends erect, defies the ruffling wind; His neck-band loose, and hosen rumpled low, A careful lad, nor slack at labour, show. Nor scraping chickens chirping ’mongst the straw, Nor croaking rook o’erhead, nor chattering daw; Loud-breathing cow amongst the rampy weeds, Nor grunting sow that in the furrows feeds: Nor sudden breeze that shakes the quaking leaves, And lightly rustles through the scattered sheaves; Nor floating straw that skims athwart his nose, The deeply-musing youth may discompose. For Nelly fair, the blithest village maid, Whose tuneful voice beneath the hedgerow-shade, At early milking, o’er the meadows borne, E’er cheered the ploughman’s toil at rising morn: The neatest maid that e’er, in linen gown, Bore cream and butter to the market town: The tightest lass, that with untutored air, E’er footed alehouse floor at wake or fair, Since Easter last had Robin’s heart possessed, And many a time disturbed his nightly rest. Full oft, returning from the loosened plough, He slacked his pace, and knit his thoughtful brow; And oft, ere half his thresher’s talk was o’er, Would muse, with arms across, at cooling door: His mind thus bent, with downcast eyes he stood, And leant upon his flail in thoughtful mood. His soul o’er many a soft rememberance ran, And, muttering to himself, the youth began.    ‘Ah! happy is the man whose early lot Hath made him master of a furnished cot; Who trains the vine that round his window grows, And after setting sun his garden hoes; Whose wattled pales his own enclosure shield, Who toils not daily in another’s field. Wheree’er he goes, to church or market-town, With more respect he and his dog are known; A brisker face he wears at wake or fair, Nor views with longing eyes the pedlar’s ware, But buys at will or ribbands, gloves or beads, And willing maidens to the alehouse leads; And, oh! secure from toils which cumber life, He makes the maid he loves an easy wife. Ah, Nelly! canst thou, with contented mind, Become the helpmate of a labouring hind, And share his lot, whate’er the chances be, Who hath no dower but love to fix on thee? Yes, gayest maid may meekest matron prove, And things of little note may ’token love. When from the church thou cam’st at eventide And I and red-haired Susan by thy side, I pulled the blossoms from the bending tree, And some to Susan gave, and some to thee; Thine were the best, and well thy smiling eye The difference marked, and guessed the reason why. When on a holiday we rambling strayed, And passed old Hodge’s cottage in the glade; Neat was the garden dressed, sweet hummed the bee, I wished both cot and Nelly made for me; And well methought thy very eyes revealed The self-same wish within thy breast concealed. When artful, once, I sought my love to tell, And spoke to thee of one who loved thee well, You saw the cheat, and jeering homeward hied, Yet secret pleasure in thy looks I spied. Ay, gayest maid may meekest matron prove, And smaller signs than these have ’tokened love.’    Now, at a distance, on the neighbouring plain, With creaking wheels slow comes the heavy wain: High on its towering load a maid appears, And Nelly’s voice sounds shrill in Robin’s ears. Quick from his hand he throws the cumbrous flail, And leaps with lightsome limbs the enclosing pale. O’er field and fence he scours, and furrows wide, With wakened Comrade barking by his side; Whilst tracks of trodden grain, and sidelong hay, And broken hedge-flowers sweet, mark his impetuous way. 
~~~
The alcove of your arm
has become my favorite room
for sleep, but I’ve been roused
by nightmares lately. Even thunderstorms
couldn’t wake you
~~~
I. ENOUGH ! we're tired, my heart and I.
  We sit beside the headstone thus,
  And wish that name were carved for us.The moss reprints more tenderly
  The hard types of the mason's knife,
  As heaven's sweet life renews earth's lifeWith which we're tired, my heart and I.II. You see we're tired, my heart and I.
  We dealt with books, we trusted men,
  And in our own blood drenched the pen,As if such colours could not fly.
  We walked too straight for fortune's end,
  We loved too true to keep a friend ;At last we're tired, my heart and I.III. How tired we feel, my heart and I !
  We seem of no use in the world ;
  Our fancies hang grey and uncurledAbout men's eyes indifferently ;
  Our voice which thrilled you so, will let
  You sleep; our tears are only wet :What do we here, my heart and I ?IV. So tired, so tired, my heart and I !
  It was not thus in that old time
  When Ralph sat with me 'neath the limeTo watch the sunset from the sky.
  Dear love, you're looking tired,' he said;
  I, smiling at him, shook my head :'Tis now we're tired, my heart and I.V. So tired, so tired, my heart and I !
  Though now none takes me on his arm
  To fold me close and kiss me warmTill each quick breath end in a sigh
  Of happy languor. Now, alone,
  We lean upon this graveyard stone,Uncheered, unkissed, my heart and I.VI. Tired out we are, my heart and I.
  Suppose the world brought diadems
  To tempt us, crusted with loose gemsOf powers and pleasures ? Let it try.
  We scarcely care to look at even
  A pretty child, or God's blue heaven,We feel so tired, my heart and I.VII. Yet who complains ? My heart and I ?
  In this abundant earth no doubt
  Is little room for things worn out :Disdain them, break them, throw them by
  And if before the days grew rough
  We once were loved, used, — well enough,I think, we've fared, my heart and I.
~~~
The bleached wood massed in bone piles,   
we pulled it from dark beach and built   
fire in a fenced clearing.
The posts’ blunt stubs sank down,
they circled and were roofed by milled   
lumber dragged at one time to the coast.   
We slept there.
Each morning the minus tide—
weeds flowed it like hair swimming.   
The starfish gripped rock, pastel,   
rough. Fish bones lay in sun.
Each noon the milk fog sank
from cloud cover, came in   
our clothes and held them   
tighter on us. Sea stacks   
stood and disappeared.
They came back when the sun
scrubbed out the inlet.
We went down to piles to get
mussels, I made my shirt
a bowl of mussel stones, carted
them to our grate where they smoked apart.   
I pulled the mussel lip bodies out,
chewed their squeak.
We went up the path for fresh water, berries.   
Hardly speaking, thinking.
During low tide we crossed   
to the island, climbed
its wet summit. The redfoots   
and pelicans dropped for fish.   
Oclets so silent fell
toward water with linked feet.
Jacynthe said little.
Long since we had spoken Nova Scotia,Michigan, and knew beauty in saying nothing.   
She told me about her mother
who would come at them with bread knives then   
stop herself, her face emptied.
I told her about me,
never lied. At night
at times the moon floated.   
We sat with arms tight   
watching flames spit, snap.   
On stone and sand picking up
wood shaped like a body, like a gull.
I ran barefoot not only
on beach but harsh gravels   
up through the woods.
I shit easy, covered my dropping.   
Some nights, no fires, we watched
sea pucker and get stabbed   
by the beacon
circling on Tatoosh.
2
I stripped and spread
on the sea lip, stretched   
to the slap of the foam   
and the vast red dulce.   
Jacynthe gripped the earth   
in her fists, opened—
the boil of the tide   
shuffled into her.
The beach revolved,
headlands behind us
put their pines in the sun.
Gulls turned a strong sky.
Their pained wings held,
they bit water quick, lifted.   
Their looping eyes continually   
measure the distance from us,   
bare women who do not touch.
Rocks drowsed, holes
filled with suds from a distance.
A deep laugh bounced in my flesh   
and sprayed her.
3
Flies crawled us,
Jacynthe crawled.
With her palms she
spread my calves, she
moved my heels from each other.   
A woman’s mouth is
not different, sand moved
wild beneath me, her long
hair wiped my legs, with women   
there is sucking, the water
slops our bodies. We come
clean, our clits beat like
twins to the loons rising up.
We are awake.
Snails sprinkle our gulps.   
Fish die in our grips, there is   
sand in the anus of dancing.   
Tatoosh Island
hardens in the distance.
We see its empty stones   
sticking out of the sea again.   
Jacynthe holds tinder
under fire to cook the night’s wood.If we had men I would make   
milk in me simply.
~~~
Gone then risen
 
Milk dawn gone then risen
 
Our ephemeral fawning done
 
Gone sanguine then risen in spell
 
High with your wrist while nihil busy
 
Unburrowing dice teams from sand figurines
 
Risen to swirl steam scooping passing seemingly
 
A kindred-ided up and up, born of dormant corners
 
Forms filial then filled          Goes mourn and swoon
 
Love have and love loom                    Union and risen
~~~
When the sun and moon were in quadrature, when  the garden had become a wilderness and the clock refused to strike When the old year died and the sand walked into the sea with the neap tide When you had been too long away and your old snowblue footprints clotted and hesitated in the clayWhen the worry of this undone song unsung so long so loud my head I went inside and under to let the flood run free
~~~
I loved a girl
when I was a girl,
before I knew desire
could be used against me.
I so wanted to be relevant.
Simple exchange—
bouquets of wheat.
My dirt-stained hands,
tangled hair. I never
could be prim,
in apple-pie order.
I dropped all the eggs,
licking their smear
off my hands;
wrinkled her ribbons
into my pocket,
tore pages from her books,
all for the sake
of the lonely hour.
~~~
After Hieronymus Bosch, “The Garden of Earthly Delights,” triptych right panel



But all dark notes are dismantled
there from the middle ear
downward. Voyaged mind, cauldron skin.
Can you claim anything is yours?
The burning salt hour
throws its black broken-glass frame skyward.
Left behind
the mum orchestra, body parts in peril
and animals dizzy for
lust past all lost
astronomy and wipeout,
this naked edible overjoy, a kind
of suicide in syllables, fifth
panic, fourth stall’s birds-fermata, this
half ocean’s susurrus is coming over us in the picture.
Can you akin? Can you
hear it, pinned to the unseasonable underearth,
an option for music and water
constantly changing shape, an answer
in dissonance? To hear desire
is to wake yourself inside, upturned,
long enough to know
tomorrow is exile. Chaos, body harp,
and painted butt music, crowd-crawl, rose
crowned to the chest, rabbit
call and playing cards    ...    listen,
I’m hell-humming in
your direction, giddy, I am too taken
to leave it alone, the will
locked in as if it is already
inside of me now: to fall.
Let’s be clear,
my darling, in the reeling
crave, spilled gut-platter
of enclosed bones, in
the final flesh-clean drop, it sounds
like fire rising
with the cliff’s updraft.
~~~
It tastes like all my night
when I'm at the bottom of the borough
sheets burn around me
through the night
Consecrate me
Consecrate me
Conserve me lover
In the sills of your love
in the cells of your palms
from the womb to cell
break me from the belly of ship
let me crash upon you
Consecrate me my lover in your rectum
in a rehabilitation center where athletes seek the best care
I break into you
Consecrate me I want to love you in Syracuse woods
in Sonnino love me against lamb’s wool
I am my sister's wife keeper
Consecrate me
in the discretion of sisters
nuns loving
and hating jobs that ask
with fangs barred
~~~
I would have come.
When you called. But.
I had the most beautiful pale pink rose.
Its healthy stem was clenched between my teeth. And.
Its thorns bit sharply into my tender wet flesh. So.
 
I couldn't answer you. Still.
My lips moved at you silently.
They offered words you never heard.
They screamed inside my crazed brain. Only.
It could do nothing for you.
 
In time the petals wilted.
They blew away. And.
They became compost in someone else's garden.
The tough, fibrous stem withered.
I bit down hard to snap its grip on me. Then.
 
My teeth fell out.
Its thorns had burrowed into my cheeks.
They had implanted themselves permanently.
They were suckling on my softest tissues. And.
Not long after they sprouted tiny shoots.
 
They coiled their way down.
I still held the memory of your call. And.
The long stemmed beauty lodged next to it.
They cleaved unto the long roots curling down my neck.
My body held tight and listened. Hard.
~~~
It was twilight all day.
Sometimes the smallest things weigh us down,
small stones that we can't help
admiring and palming.
Look at the tiny way
this lighter vein got inside.
Look at the heavy gray dome of its sky.
This is no immutable world.
We know less than its atoms, rushing through.
Light, light. Light as air, to them,
for all we know. Trust me on this one,
there is happiness at stake.
Boulder, grain. Planet, dust:
What fills the stones fills us.
I remember, or I have a feeling,
I could be living somewhere with you,
weighted down the way we aren't now.
Often the greatest things,
those you'd think would be the heaviest,
are the very ones that float.
~~~
Passing away, saith the World, passing away:Chances, beauty and youth, sapp'd day by day:Thy life never continueth in one stay.Is the eye waxen dim, is the dark hair changing to greyThat hath won neither laurel nor bay?I shall clothe myself in Spring and bud in May:Thou, root-stricken, shalt not rebuild thy decayOn my bosom for aye.Then I answer'd: Yea.Passing away, saith my Soul, passing away:With its burden of fear and hope, of labour and play,Hearken what the past doth witness and say:Rust in thy gold, a moth is in thine array,A canker is in thy bud, thy leaf must decay.At midnight, at cockcrow, at morning, one certain dayLo, the Bridegroom shall come and shall not delay:Watch thou and pray.Then I answer'd: Yea.Passing away, saith my God, passing away:Winter passeth after the long delay:New grapes on the vine, new figs on the tender spray,Turtle calleth turtle in Heaven's May.Though I tarry, wait for Me, trust Me, watch and pray.Arise, come away, night is past and lo it is day,My love, My sister, My spouse, thou shalt hear Me say.Then I answer'd: Yea.
~~~
O Donald! ye are just the man
 Who, when he’s got a wife,Begins to fratch— nae notice ta’en—
 They’re strangers a’ their life.The fan may drop— she takes it up,
 The husband keeps his chair;She hands the kettle— gives his cup—
 Without e’en— thank ye, dear.”Now, truly, these slights are but toys;
 But frae neglects like these,The wife may soon a slattern grow,
 And strive nae mair to please.For wooers ay do all they can
 To trifle wi’ the mind;They hold the blaze of beauty up,
 And keep the poor things blind.But wedlock tears away the veil,
 The goddess is nae mair;He thinks his wife a silly thing,
 She thinks her man a bear.Let then the lover be the friend—
 The loving friend for life;Think but thysel the happiest spouse,
 She’ll be the happiest wife.
~~~
I only have a moment so let me tell you the shortest story,about arriving at a long loved place, the house of friends in Maine,their lawn of wildflowers, their grandfather clock and candidportraits, their gabled attic rooms, and woodstove in the kitchen,all accessories of the genuine summer years before, when I wastheir son’s girlfriend and tied an apron behind my neck, beneathmy braids, and took from their garden the harvest for a dinnerI would make alone and serve at their big table with the gladnessof the found, and loved. The eggplant shone like polished wood,the tomatoes smelled like their furred collars, the dozen zucchinilined up on the counter like placid troops with the onions, theirminions, and I even remember the garlic, each clove from its airmail envelope brought to the cutting board, ready for my instruction.And in this very slight story, a decade later, I came by myself,having been dropped by the airport cab, and waited for the familyto arrive home from work. I walked into the lawn, waist-highin the swaying, purple lupines, the subject of   June’s afternoon lightas I had never been addressed — a displaced young woman withcropped hair, no place to which I wished to return, and no oneto gather me in his arms. That day the lupines received me,and I was in love with them, because they were all I had left,and in that same manner I have loved much of the world since then,and who is to say there is more of a reason, or more to love?
~~~
Time does not bring relief; you all have lied   
Who told me time would ease me of my pain!   
I miss him in the weeping of the rain;   
I want him at the shrinking of the tide;
The old snows melt from every mountain-side,   
And last year’s leaves are smoke in every lane;   
But last year’s bitter loving must remain
Heaped on my heart, and my old thoughts abide.   
There are a hundred places where I fear   
To go,—so with his memory they brim.   
And entering with relief some quiet place   
Where never fell his foot or shone his face   
I say, “There is no memory of him here!”   
And so stand stricken, so remembering him.
~~~
This is the multitude, the beasts you wanted to show me, drawing me upstream, all morning up through wind-scoured heather to the hillcrest. Below us, in the next glen, is the grave calm brotherhood, descended out of winter, out of hunger, kneeling like the signatories of a covenant; their weighty, antique-polished antlers rising above the vegetation like masts in a harbor, or city spires. We lie close together, and though the windwhips away our man-and-woman smell, everystag-face seems to look toward us, toward, but not to us: we’re held, and hold them, in civil regard. I suspect you’d hoped to impress me, to lift to my sight our shared country, lead me deeper into what you know, but loathto cause fear you’re already moving quietly away, sure I’ll go with you, as I would now, almost anywhere.
~~~
Eph. What Friendship is, Ardelia show.Ard. ’Tis to love, as I love you.Eph. This account, so short (tho’ kind)
    Suits not my inquiring mind.
    Therefore farther now repeat:
    What is Friendship when complete?Ard. ’Tis to share all joy and grief;
    ’Tis to lend all due relief
    From the tongue, the heart, the hand;
    ’Tis to mortgage house and land;
    For a friend be sold a slave;
    ’Tis to die upon a grave,
    If a friend therein do lie.Eph. This indeed, tho’ carried high,
    This, tho’ more than e’er was done
    Underneath the rolling sun,
    This has all been said before.
    Can Ardelia say no more?Ard. Words indeed no more can show:But ’tis to love, as I love you.
~~~
I can enter the morning with traces of an eternal dream: to live
on a planet of women. we sing in the fertile forest, caress on
lavender hills, bathe beneath cascades of clear waters. and just
like that, nude and wet, we mount each other’s bodies. our
desire is a whale that searches for calm in the depth of the sea.
 
I smell sex in my hair when I awaken.
 
the dream perfumes all of my days. I go to the post office and
look for stamps with etchings of flowers and fruits so that I can
send letters to the women who loved me in my sleep.
 
we are in a world that is not ours. what do we do with the
dreams that touch our consciousness in the nude each night?
 
our planet of women is nothing more than a dream. who knows
how many of us bathe in the woods or which ones of us have
wings that let us fly with our flesh? it’s not for anyone to know.
fortunately, we always dream paradise, we make it ours. there,
we find each other and live in our collective memory.
 
and so, I smell sex in my hair when I awaken.
~~~
You get over these constant storms and learn to be married all over again, every day.
—Barry Hannah 
 



The foyer is hers because the kettle is hers as it was made for water and the water is hers          because the sac that grew the baby was hers though the semen that made the sac was his                                     like his boots are his and the tea that’s of the kettle

  after it enters his mouth is his unless it’s hers since it’s inside the kitchen that’s hers

  and therefore not his unless he’s simmering the Asian sauces that are his                   because they’re dense and knotty rather than milkish and paltry                                     like everything else from the nation state of the motherland

  of the no-mercy child who won’t stop sucking and wanting and whining in the ear that is his

  although the child herself belongs somehow to the woman and thus its hunger is hers                   as is the bed and dresser and mirror and latch                                     though the hammer naturally is his and the saw and lumber

  and back and muscle he suffered to build because he guessed he thought it would be

  good for something besides this house like a pestilence of people who weren’t his                   because nothing was his except the whirl he carried in his belly of the mix-up                                     of loving her in the first place like being sucked

  into a burrow of lava embers and putting your tongue to it until it caught fire

  and all he could say was that the burn was his—this hole in the mouth—                   this fiasco of the woman bent now in the garden to smell the cilantro                                     as though she didn’t know his head was split

  with hating her and loving her and hating her and loving her

  because she was an ache and a kink and somehow the furrow—the groove and the rut—                   and age and death and kiss and fuck and not-fuck and song and not-song                                     and no it was not sweet though he’d go on and carry it

                                                        since also—since mostly—it was.

 
~~~
Love is like the wild rose-briar,Friendship like the holly-tree—The holly is dark when the rose-briar bloomsBut which will bloom most constantly?The wild rose-briar is sweet in spring,Its summer blossoms scent the air;Yet wait till winter comes againAnd who will call the wild-briar fair?Then scorn the silly rose-wreath nowAnd deck thee with the holly’s sheen,That when December blights thy browHe still may leave thy garland green.
~~~
(Too sound of mind)



The paper table cloth was tastefully bleak,
The misty morning light shone on his cheek,
And made him look alone and masculine.
He talked of Seneca and bad translations,
Of modern critics' lightweight observations;
A bread crumb rested sweetly on his chin.
Behind him, through the glass, the ocean's heave
Uncurled against the sand, beside his sleeve,
As Eros aimed his toxic javelin.
I ducked out of the way, to no avail;
It glanced my flesh, injecting quite a cocktail
That blurred my sight and caused my head to spin—
Never mind the coffee we were drinking,
Whatever I said was not what I was thinking.
I wanted to become his mandolin,
And lie across his lap, a dainty lute,
And sing to him and feed him ripened fruit,
While light upon the sea turned opaline.
Instead, this conversation about art
And formal education—God, he's smart!
Such rationality should be a sin.
The hour was up, he had to run, of course;
A handshake and a peck of shy remorse—
Outside, the sea was gray and dull as tin;
It ruled the shore with tedious discipline.
~~~
I have seen the proudest starsThat wander on through space,Even the sun and moon,But not your face.I have heard the violin,The winds and waves rejoicein endless minstrelsy,Yet not your voice.I have touched the trillium,Pale flower of the land,Coral, anemone,And not your hand.I have kissed the shining feetOf Twilight lover-wise,Opened the gates of Dawn—Oh not your eyes!I have dreamed unwonted things,Visions that witches brew,Spoken with images,Never with you.
~~~
When beauty breaks and falls asunder   
I feel no grief for it, but wonder.
When love, like a frail shell, lies broken,   
I keep no chip of it for token.
I never had a man for friend
Who did not know that love must end.   
I never had a girl for lover
Who could discern when love was over.   
What the wise doubt, the fool believes—
Who is it, then, that love deceives?
~~~
Because she'd heard him laugh through new moon darkness
and she knew he'd fallen and she knew, before she turned,
he'd be crawling, like a crawdad, rock to loam—
because she tried to love the straight back and neck
he'd erected to recollect the man he'd been
before—because she found herself adding up his usefulness
like some kind of auctioneer—she showed him
the dark coils areoling both her breasts and all the ways
she bent and lifted, bent and lifted, steady, strong.
She let him believe he was past due for a harvest
and her hands were the right ones, now, to hold onto the scythe.
 
                                                         • 
She made quick work of pleasure. The boysmile bunked down
in his eyes, she claimed. Her tongue found the place in his mouth
where the teeth were gone—where he'd hold his corncakes
until they grew soft enough to chew. History had bedded him
in all of this—his own history and failures not his own.
Before he'd tramped in she'd watched another man—a man she'd thought
she'd hated—watched his body opened, opened, opened until
blood had married brine. She'd watch that man be whipped into something
good for nothing more than fertilizing clay and she'd thought
buckshot would have been a brand of kindness if sprayed into him
just then. But even after his hard going, she did not miss him very much.
                                                        •
Anyone she chose could be shucked like surplus property tomorrow,
but that hadn't been enough to warn her off of picking him that night.
Because she knew if she set her sight on nothing she'd get nothing
in return, she'd walked with him. But because the night progressed so
—because there were some clouds—no stars—no moon—he'd tripped
over the branch of a dead and down tree. In all that darkness,
there, without a moon, even then, she had not fallen. She thought
to say so, but she did not say so. She did nothing
but say she was sorry for him. She did not use her mouth
to say this. Could he not listen to her hands? They spoke softly,
articulating her condolences, to his torn and bleeding skin.
 
~~~
Oh, oh, you will be sorry for that word!
Give back my book and take my kiss instead.
Was it my enemy or my friend I heard,
“What a big book for such a little head!”
Come, I will show you now my newest hat,
And you may watch me purse my mouth and prink!
Oh, I shall love you still, and all of that.
I never again shall tell you what I think.
I shall be sweet and crafty, soft and sly;
You will not catch me reading any more:
I shall be called a wife to pattern by;
And some day when you knock and push the door,
Some sane day, not too bright and not too stormy,
I shall be gone, and you may whistle for me.
 
~~~
Ay, gaze upon her rose-wreathed hair,
And gaze upon her smile;
Seem as you drank the very air
Her breath perfumed the while:
And wake for her the gifted line,
That wild and witching lay,
And swear your heart is as a shrine,
That only owns her sway.
’Tis well: I am revenged at last,—
Mark you that scornful cheek,—
The eye averted as you pass’d,
Spoke more than words could speak.
Ay, now by all the bitter tears
That I have shed for thee,—
The racking doubts, the burning fears,—
Avenged they well may be—
By the nights pass’d in sleepless care,
The days of endless woe;
All that you taught my heart to bear,
All that yourself will know.
I would not wish to see you laid
Within an early tomb;
I should forget how you betray’d,
And only weep your doom:
But this is fitting punishment,
To live and love in vain,—
Oh my wrung heart, be thou content,
And feed upon his pain.
Go thou and watch her lightest sigh,—
Thine own it will not be;
And bask beneath her sunny eye,—
It will not turn on thee.
’Tis well: the rack, the chain, the wheel,
Far better hadst thou proved;
Ev’n I could almost pity feel,
For thou art not beloved.
~~~
Through your lens the sequoia swallowed me   
like a dryad. The camera flashed & forgot.
I, on the other hand, must practice my absent-
mindedness, memory being awkward as a touch   
that goes unloved. Lately your eyes have shut
down to a shade more durable than skin’s. I know you   
love distance, how it smooths. You choose an aerial view,   
the city angled to abstraction, while I go for the close   
exposures: poorly-mounted countenances along Broadway,   
the pigweed cracking each hardscrabble backlot.   
It’s a matter of perspective: yours is to love me   
from a block away & mine is to praise the grain-
iness that weaves expressively: your face.
~~~
It’s you I’d like to see Greece again withYou I’d like to take to bed of cyclamenYou know I nurse a certain mythabout myself              that I descendde tribus d’origine asiatiqueand am part Thracian or Macedoniancleaving to a Hellenic mystiqueafter centuries’ migration inlanda full moon             rising over the AcropolisI can repeat the scene        this time à deuxas then I had no one to kissslicing halloumi amid the hullabalooof a rooftop taverna in   JulyThe doors that opened to loverspulled like tree roots from darkness        Iclose upon us now like book coversThe alcove in which we embraceis cool with brilliant tileand weirded by a dove’s note       chaseof ouzo with Uzi          junta-styleHistory makes its noise      we ducktill it passes      Love we think is our dueNot we think like the epochthe unchosen thing we’re wedded to
~~~
I am the blossom pressed in a book,
found again after two hundred years. . . .
I am the maker, the lover, and the keeper....
When the young girl who starves
sits down to a table
she will sit beside me. . . .
I am food on the prisoner's plate. . . .
I am water rushing to the wellhead,
filling the pitcher until it spills. . . .
I am the patient gardener
of the dry and weedy garden. . . .
I am the stone step,
the latch, and the working hinge. . . .
I am the heart contracted by joy. . . .
the longest hair, white
before the rest. . . .
I am there in the basket of fruit
presented to the widow. . . .
I am the musk rose opening
unattended, the fern on the boggy summit. . . .
I am the one whose love
overcomes you, already with you
when you think to call my name. . . .
~~~
Tom, will you let me love you in your restaurant?
I will let you make me a sandwich of your invention and I will eat it and call
it a carolyn sandwich. Then you will kiss my lips and taste the mayon­naise and 
that is how you shall love me in my restaurant
Tom, will you come to my empty beige apartment and help me set up my daybed?
Yes, and I will put the screws in loosely so that when we move on it, later,
it will rock like a cradle and then you will know you are my baby
Tom, I am sitting on my dirt bike on the deck. Will you come out from the kitchen
and watch the people with me?
Yes, and then we will race to your bedroom. I will win and we will tangle up
on your comforter while the sweat rains from our stomachs and fore­heads
Tom, the stars are sitting in tonight like gumball gems in a little girl’s 
jewelry box. Later can we walk to the duck pond?
Yes, and we can even go the long way past the jungle gym. I will push you on
the swing, but promise me you’ll hold tight. If you fall I might disappear
Tom, can we make a baby together? I want to be a big pregnant woman with a
loved face and give you a squalling red daughter.
No, but I will come inside you and you will be my daughter
Tom, will you stay the night with me and sleep so close that we are one person?
No, but I will lie down on your sheets and taste you. There will be feathers
of you on my tongue and then I will never forget you
Tom, when we are in line at the convenience store can I put my hands in your
back pockets and my lips and nose in your baseball shirt and feel the crook
of your shoulder blade?
No, but later you can lie against me and almost touch me and when I go I will
leave my shirt for you to sleep in so that always at night you will be pressed
up against the thought of me
Tom, if I weep and want to wait until you need me will you promise that someday
you will need me?
No, but I will sit in silence while you rage, you can knock the chairs down
any mountain. I will always be the same and you will always wait
Tom, will you climb on top of the dumpster and steal the sun for me? It’s just
hanging there and I want it.
No, it will burn my fingers. No one can have the sun: it’s on loan from God.
But I will draw a picture of it and send it to you from Richmond and then you
can smooth out the paper and you will have a piece of me as well as the sun
Tom, it’s so hot here, and I think I’m being born. Will you come back from
Richmond and baptise me with sex and cool water?
I will come back from Richmond. I will smooth the damp spiky hairs from the
back of your neck and then I will lick the salt off it. Then I will leave
Tom, Richmond is so far away. How will I know how you love me?
I have left you. That is how you will know
~~~
I think she wanted to explain
                                      the silence
             hidden
within her voice—
blue egg in the nettles.
            She wrote something
on a rock, used the rock
                        to bash in the skull
             of an injured deer.
Bloodied swan-neck arms.
                                        She
slinks into her own viscera,
a baby fox
             backing into its trunkhole.The wordbone's connected to the                         gutbone.
Meanwhile, her desire
           for nobody now
bucks like a rabbit
                           under her ground.
~~~
I was enriched, not casting after marvels,
But as one walking in a usual place,
Without desert but common eyes and ears,
No recourse but to hear, power but to see,
Got to love you of grace.
Subtle musicians, that could body wind,
Or contrive strings to anguish, in conceit
Random and artless strung a branch with bells,
Fixed in one silver whim, which at a touch
Shook and were sweet.
And you, you lovely and unpurchased note,
One run distraught, and vexing hot and cold
To give to the heart’s poor confusion tongue,
By chance caught you, and henceforth all unlearned
Repeats you gold.
~~~
I had not thought of violets late,The wild, shy kind that spring beneath your feetIn wistful April days, when lovers mateAnd wander through the fields in raptures sweet.The thought of violets meant florists' shops,And bows and pins, and perfumed papers fine;And garish lights, and mincing little fopsAnd cabarets and soaps, and deadening wines.So far from sweet real things my thoughts had strayed,I had forgot wide fields; and clear brown streams;The perfect loveliness that God has made,—Wild violets shy and Heaven-mounting dreams.And now—unwittingly, you've made me dreamOf violets, and my soul's forgotten gleam.
~~~
Strephon kissed me in the spring,
   Robin in the fall,But Colin only looked at me
   And never kissed at all.Strephon's kiss was lost in jest,
   Robin's lost in play,But the kiss in Colin's eyes
   Haunts me night and day.
~~~
Someone was searching for a Form of Fire.
Bird-eyed, the wind watched.
Four deer in a blowsy meadow.
As though it were simply random, a stately stare.
 
What’s six and six and two and ten?
Time that my eye ached, my heart shook, why.
Mistaking lime for lemon.
Dressed in cobalt, charcoal, thistle—and control.
 
If they had more they would need less.
A proposal from the squinting logician.
Seems we are legal, seems we are ill.
Ponderous purpose, are you weather, are you wheel?
 
Gold with a heart of cinder.
Little blue chip dancing in the light of the loom.
Mistress, May-girl, whom will you kiss?
The death of water is the birth of air.
~~~
The strings, as if they knewthe lovers are about to meet, beginto soar, and when he marches in the doorthey soar some more—half ecstasy, half pain,the musical equivalent of rain—while children who have grown up with one staresteal further looks across a crowded room,as goners tend to do.My father loved it too,warned me at dinner that he’d be a wrecklong before the final trio came(Ja, ja, she sighed, and gave him up forever);he found his Sophie better late than neverand took the fifth about his silent tearsbut like him I’m a softie, with a massivegift for feeling blue.I went with others, threwbouquets and caution to the whirling wind,believing that the rhapsody on stagewould waft its wonders up to our cheap seats;but mirrors can be beautiful fierce cheats,delusions of an over-smitten mind;I relished trouser roles until I hadno petals left to strew.Up, down the avenueI wandered like a ghost, I wondered whya miracle is always a mirage,then plodded home and set back all the clocks,spent hard-won funds installing strong new locks,telling myself if violence like thiscould never sound like violins, I wouldto art, not life, be true.And I am trying tofathom the way I got from there to here,the joy that snuck up when I’d sworn off joy:we’ve made a sterling start, we’ve got a planto watch it on your satin couch downtownand I’ll be there upon the stroke of eight,bearing in my trembling ungloved handa silver rose for you.
~~~
There is a strong wall about me to protect me: It is built of the words you have said to me. There are swords about me to keep me safe: They are the kisses of your lips. Before me goes a shield to guard me from harm: It is the shadow of your arms between me and danger. All the wishes of my mind know your name, And the white desires of my heart They are acquainted with you. The cry of my body for completeness, That is a cry to you. My blood beats out your name to me,     unceasing, pitiless Your name, your name.
~~~
Up late watching slug porn, you confessyou had a boyfriend who could spin you like that, slug grace and slug ballet—we don’ttouch the topic of slime—and those eyes dangling from tentacle tips must be akind of love or lust, sighting farther andnearer all at once. (But are those eyes?)  Slug sublimity suggests love’s a drag, touch that lingers and leaves a wet trail of memory and... What did we do before YouTube? Boob tube. Boobs we have none; slugs, of course, don’t care, can’t tell girl from boy, (being, you know, hermaphrodites), and only want flesh to fly. Forget their infamous languor—here’s litheness in loving, buoyant miracles of want, one slug spiraling on the axis of another like a globe slapped by an insolent hand. Neither old nor young, we’re familiar with sluggishness, too tired to explain why nothing makes us spin like that: a-swirl, a pirouette, a gyre! It’s either fucking or marriage, I say,saying more than I mean. Why can’t lust belove and love be lust? you’re always asking, even now as the slugs begin their sluggishwithdrawal—each complete in love and lust;each mother and father to what they’ve madetogether; each alone, content, and free.
~~~
Dear Letters, Fond Letters,        Must I with you part? You are such a source of joy    To my lonely heart. Sweet Letters, Dear Letters,        What a tell you tell; O, no power on earth can break    This strange mystic spell! Dear Letters, Fond Letters,        You my secret know—Don’t you tell it, any one—     Let it live and grow.
~~~
A youth for Jane with ardour sighed,
 The maid with sparkling eye;But to his vows she still replied,
 ‘I’ll hear you by and by.’‘Suspense (he cries) my bloom decays,
 And bids my spirits fly;Now hear my vows,’ — but still she says,
 ‘I’ll hear you by and by.’At length her frowns his love subdue,
 He shuns her scornful eye,And Emma seeks, who’ll hear him woo
 Both now, and by and by.And soon to church he leads the maid,
 When lo! he sees draw nigh,The now repentant fair who said
 She’d hear him by and by.‘Hear me (she cries): no more in vain
 Thy hear for me shall sigh!’ —
 ‘I’m busy now (said he) — but, Jane!
 I’ll hear you by and by.’
~~~
I like to touch your tattoos in complete
darkness, when I can’t see them. I’m sure of
where they are, know by heart the neat
lines of lightning pulsing just above
your nipple, can find, as if by instinct, the blue
swirls of water on your shoulder where a serpent
twists, facing a dragon. When I pull you
to me, taking you until we’re spent
and quiet on the sheets, I love to kiss
the pictures in your skin. They’ll last until
you’re seared to ashes; whatever persists
or turns to pain between us, they will still
be there. Such permanence is terrifying.
So I touch them in the dark; but touch them, trying.
~~~
I want a red dress.
I want it flimsy and cheap,
I want it too tight, I want to wear it
until someone tears it off me.
I want it sleeveless and backless,
this dress, so no one has to guess
what’s underneath. I want to walk down
the street past Thrifty’s and the hardware store
with all those keys glittering in the window,
past Mr. and Mrs. Wong selling day-old
donuts in their café, past the Guerra brothers
slinging pigs from the truck and onto the dolly,
hoisting the slick snouts over their shoulders.
I want to walk like I’m the only
woman on earth and I can have my pick.
I want that red dress bad.
I want it to confirm
your worst fears about me,
to show you how little I care about you
or anything except what
I want. When I find it, I’ll pull that garment
from its hanger like I’m choosing a body
to carry me into this world, through
the birth-cries and the love-cries too,
and I’ll wear it like bones, like skin,
it’ll be the goddamned
dress they bury me in.
~~~
Love has gone and left me and the days are all alike;
   Eat I must, and sleep I will, — and would that night were here!But ah! — to lie awake and hear the slow hours strike!
   Would that it were day again! — with twilight near!Love has gone and left me and I don't know what to do;
   This or that or what you will is all the same to me;But all the things that I begin I leave before I'm through, —
   There's little use in anything as far as I can see.Love has gone and left me, — and the neighbors knock and borrow,
   And life goes on forever like the gnawing of a mouse, —And to-morrow and to-morrow and to-morrow and to-morrow
   There's this little street and this little house.
~~~
Herodotus says the king made a bowl to leave behind
the memory of a number. We don’t know the number.
We don’t know if it was divisible by two or three.
I want, at the moment, the number to indicate
a ratio, part of a proportion, because the measurement
of the earth depends on this, the balance among things,
the snow at the bottom of the hill, the gold garage light
caged in a tree, my love for my friend and the distance
between us, which I can’t bear.
I made a pinhole camera to demonstrate proportion,
and everything bright hovers on its milky eye,
and here is the catalogue of what hovers there
smaller than itself: the blue horizon and the dash
at the stoplight, a shell night-light, the gazing ball
of the sun going down against the white back fence,
which made it look like night in the woods lit
from underneath on the wax. I held these things
yesterday, along with two pearls that are spheres
hanging from my living room ceiling.
My friend is smaller now, and if I held my camera up
to her, she would give off enough light to hover
pocket-sized in my hand, and grand in the world.
~~~
She arrived at the country mansion in a silver limousine.
She’d sent out invitations and everything:
her name written twice with “&” in the middle,
the calligraphy of coupling.
She strode down the aisle to “At Last” by Etta James,
faced the celebrant like a keen soldier reporting for duty,
her voice shaky yet sure. I do. I do.
“You may now kiss the mirror.” Applause. Confetti.
Every single one of the hundred and forty guests
deemed the service “unimprovable.”
Especially the vows. So “from the heart.”
Her wedding gown was ivory; pointedly off-white,
“After all, we’ve shared a bed for thirty-two years,”
she quipped in her first speech,
“I’m hardly virginal if you know what I mean.”
(No one knew exactly what she meant.)
Not a soul questioned their devotion.
You only had to look at them. Hand cupped in hand.
Smiling out of the same eyes. You could sense
their secret language, bone-deep, blended blood.
Toasts were frequent, tearful. One guest
eyed his wife — hovering harmlessly at the bar — and
imagined what his life might’ve been if
he’d responded, years ago, to that offer in his head:“I’m the only one who will ever truly understand you.
Marry me, Derek. I love you. Marry me.”
~~~
My heart is a fancy place
Where giant reddish-purple cauliflowers
& white ones in French & English are outside
Waiting to welcome you to a boat
Over the low black river for a big dinner
There's alot of choice among the foods
Even a tortured lamb served in pieces
En croute on a plate so hot as a rack
Of clouds blown over the cold filthy river
We are entitled to see anytime while we
Use the tablecovers to love each other
Publicly dishing out imitative luxuries
To show off poetry's extreme generosity
Then home in the heart of a big limousine
~~~
All night I hear the noise of water sobbing. All night I make night in me, I make the day that begins on my account, that sobs because day falls like water through night.
         All night I hear the voice of someone seeking me out. All night you abandon me slowly like the water that sobs slowly falling. All night I write luminous messages, messages of rain, all night someone checks for me and I check for someone.
         The noise of steps in the circle near this choleric light birthed from my insomnia. Steps of someone who no longer writhes, who no longer writes. All night someone holds back, then crosses the circle of bitter light.
         All night I drown in your eyes become my eyes. All night I prod myself on toward that squatter in the circle of my silence. All night I see something lurch toward my looking, something humid, contrived of silence launching the sound of someone sobbing.
         Absence blows grayly and night goes dense. Night, the shade of the eyelids of the dead, viscous night, exhaling some black oil that blows me forward and prompts me to search out an empty space without warmth, without cold. All night I flee from someone. I lead the chase, I lead the fugue. I sing a song of mourning. Black birds over black shrouds. My brain cries. Demented wind. I leave the tense and strained hand, I don’t want to know anything but this perpetual wailing, this clatter in the night, this delay, this infamy, this pursuit, this inexistence.
         All night I see that abandonment is me, that the sole sobbing voice is me. We can search with lanterns, cross the shadow’s lie. We can feel the heart thud in the thigh and water subside in the archaic site of the heart.
         All night I ask you why. All night you tell me no.
 
~~~
They lie under stars in a field. They lie under rain in a field. Under sun.  Some people are like this as well— like a painting hidden beneath another painting.  An unexpected weight the sign of their ripeness.
~~~
I thought I had lost myself,
but I see it’s you that’s gone missing.
O always elsewhere.
What yacht or spaceship have you hijacked?
In what seedy hideaway do you scoff
at the sameness of all cities, all ideas?
Once you made me loquacious
because what’s the point in saying anything
if there isn’t the possibility of being misunderstood.
Now I am nearly speechless with boredom.
I will wait Madame Butterfly-style for your return.
~~~
I  Today I dissected a squid, the late acacia tossing its pollen across the black of the lab bench. In a few months the maples  will be bleeding. That was the thing:  there was no blood only textures of gills creased like satin,  suction cups as planets in rows. Be careful not to cut your finger
~~~
& no it’s not a landscape painting
I’m talking about a prospect wherein
vision gets unhooked from the sockets. & no it’s not
a love song about blindness or the way
she moves. rather it is standing
in the midst of nothing & the wind passing
since seeing was always a curse, the boundary
between things floating
up to foil how anyone might touch
or travel. unless we can find a non-
delineated dance proliferating otherwise
in the unhasty unfolding of we’re already there
à la Hegel re: Kant, & not like
that Caspar David Friedrich painting either
(some solitary man-figure surveying
what was already his so it becomes his again)
but instead unvisioning the world, not like
Heidegger, obviously, not the thing at hand
but like the hand repeating a motion
forever, writing her beloved like this is politicsthis is the end of all endings
& the wind
~~~
you are my bread
and the hairline
noise
of my bones
you are almost
the sea
you are not stone
or molten sound
I think
you have no hands
this kind of bird flies backward
and this love
breaks on a windowpane
where no light talks
this is not time
for crossing tongues
(the sand here
never shifts)
I think
tomorrow
turned you with his toe
and you will
shine
and shine
unspent and underground
~~~
Not embittered   even while freezing   to the ice of their own lakes.   The night I was leaving for Madrid   into the noisy party a dazzling   friend-of-a-friend walked in: I want so much   (as a couple of kids on the dance floor want)   to slow the tempo, hold there longer,   to feel that seedly longing   to be pressed into the soil,   or that little lift the mothers get   when stocking larders, even now,   vestige of the primitive urge   to be provided for and to provide.             I went alone to see that balcony   in Verona, after the Roman dramas and luxuries   above the Spanish Steps, when an elegant   footman brought a pack of Reds on a silver   tray and all but smoked them for you;   after your towels had warmed in London’s best   hotel, whose name I can’t remember and am kind of glad,   glad now for the rest of empty August and   the convent hostel’s eleven o’clock curfew,   glad now when I go to the distinguished dinners   that I have stood alone   wondering at illuminated books,   looking at Woolf’s spectacles under glass   or standing under Bourgeois’s giant spider   at the Tate—at times the best kept universe   was my own, no interceding docents   or guided tours, but a riverine serendipitous   wandering—waif, naïf.                    I liked the light enormously so why   did I obey the bell that called me in?
~~~
When everything finally has been wrecked and further shipwrecked,
When their most ardent dream has been made hollow and unrecognizable,
They will feel inside their limbs the missing shade of blue that lingers
Against hills in the cooler hours before dark, and the moss at the foot of the forest
When green starts to leave it. What they take into their privacy (half of his embrace,
Her violence at play) are shadows of acts which have no farewells in them.
Moons unearth them. And when, in their separate dwellings, their bodies
Feel the next season come, they no longer have anyone to whom
To tell it. Clouds of reverie pass outside the window and a strange emptiness
Peers back in. If they love, it is solely to be adored, it is to scatter and gather
Themselves like hard seeds in a field made fallow by a fire someone years ago set.
In the quiet woods, from the highest trees, there is always something
Weightless falling; and he, who must realize that certain losses are irreparable,
Tells himself at night, before the darkest mirror, that vision keeps him whole.
On the verge of warm and simple sleep they tell themselves certain loves
Are like sheets of dark water, or ice forests, or husks of ships. To stop a thing
Such as this would be to halve a sound that travels out from a silent person’s
Thoughts. The imprint they make on each other’s bodies is worth any pain
They may have caused. Quiet falls around them. And when she reaches
For him the air greens like underwater light and the well-waters drop.
They will see again the shadows of insects.
They will touch the bark and feel each age of the tree fly undisturbed
Into them. If what is no longer present in them cannot be restored,
It can at least be offered. Through long bewildered dusks, stalks grow;
Rains fill and pass out of clouds; animals hover at the edges of fields
With eyes like black pools. For nothing cannot be transformed;
Pleasure and failure feed each other daily. Do not think any breeze,
Any grain of light, shall be withheld. All the stars will sail out for them.
~~~
Never let my hands be to any one an occasion to temptation. — ISABEL DE FLORES



She was the joke of the angels—a girl crazy enough for Godthat she despised her own beauty; who grew bitter herbs to mix with her food,who pinned a garland of roses to her forehead; and who, in a fury of desireconcocted a potion of Indian pepper and bark and rubbed it on her face, neck, and breasts,disfiguring herself.Then, locked away in a dark cell,where no reflection was possible,she begged for death to join her with her Masterwhom she called Divine Bridegroom, Thorn in My Heart, Eternal Spouse.
~~~
How solitary
and resolute you look in the morning.
A stoic in your cotton sleeve.
Do you dream of walking out
rain or shine
a truffle balanced on your sternum
and passing me on the sidewalk?
Or is that a smile
because you interpret nothing
and statelessness is where you live?
How calmly you indulge my moods.
See you tonight, by the sovereign chartreuse
ceramics at the Met.
Let's hear what you'd do differently.
~~~
Supper comes at five o'clock,
At six, the evening star,
My lover comes at eight o'clock—
But eight o'clock is far.
How could I bear my pain all day
Unless I watched to see
The clock-hands laboring to bring
Eight o'clock to me.
~~~
Spiked sun. The Hudson’s
Whittled down by ice.
I hear the bone dice
Of blown gravel clicking. Bone-
pale, the recent snow
Fastens like fur to the river.
Standstill. We were leaving to deliver
Christmas presents when the tire blew
Last year. Above the dead valves pines pared
Down by a storm stood, limbs bared . . .
I want you.
~~~
With the man I love who loves me not,
   I walked in the street-lamps' flare;We watched the world go home that night
   In a flood through Union Square.I leaned to catch the words he said
   That were light as a snowflake falling;Ah well that he never leaned to hear
   The words my heart was calling.And on we walked and on we walked
   Past the fiery lights of the picture shows —Where the girls with thirsty eyes go by
   On the errand each man knows.And on we walked and on we walked,
   At the door at last we said good-bye;I knew by his smile he had not heard
   My heart's unuttered cry.With the man I love who loves me not
   I walked in the street-lamps' flare —But oh, the girls who ask for love
   In the lights of Union Square.
~~~
i
Dear A. — Nailing crockery to the walls
was not something I ever understood,
but Simonetta’s maiolica falls,
like this sideboard, painted wood,
under the enchantment of a freehand look — 
a curling script, a loose grape tendril,
the forms that hecatomb smoke took
purling to a Roman god’s nostril    ...    
Because geranium is crinkled
in the spillage from the wishing well,
now outdated and backfilled,
this whole place evinces the nature
of a souvenir plate. Another tell:
the mosquito flourish in its signature.ii
The rustic bicycle, like a pen
that spent its ink, wrote an invisible sentence
to the ramparts and back, now and again
rolling through the arches of an aqueduct
dowsing with its sixth sense
across the hillsides. Locals tucked
plastic water bottles under spouts
chiseled into lions’ pouts
stationed at intervals, like shrines.
Their cars idled while they stooped,
and on Sundays even formed lines.
They trust this water more, Lorenzo whooped,
than what comes out of their taps?
The sources snake beneath the maps.iii
The little terrier Amore, they warned me,
had eaten the seat belts; so there I was,
my friend, fearing whiplash in the back seat
(no headrest either!), in all respects afloat — 
Simonetta on alert for signs of gallantry,
like the wives of those diminished Casanovas
who dream they’ve merely grown discreet.
And the dissertation she once wrote
on courtesan-poetesses, fancying herself
of that ilk (“Like me!” — a phrase she’d strew
among her compliments) gathers dust on a shelf.
When I think of Boccherini’s metacarpals
interred beneath the soppressata marbles
of the duomo, I think: Casa del Diavolo. Those two.
~~~
He dwelt among “apartments let,”       About five stories high; A man I thought that none would get,       And very few would try. A boulder, by a larger stone       Half hidden in the mud, Fair as a man when only one       Is in the neighborhood. He lived unknown, and few could tell       When Jacob was not free; But he has got a wife,—and O!       The difference to me!
~~~
The man moves earth  to dispel grief. He digs holes the size of cars. In proportion to what is taken  what is given multiplies— rain-swollen ponds and dirt mounds rooted with flame-tipped flowers. He carries trees like children  struggling to be set down.  Trees that have lived out their lives, he cuts and stacks like loaves of bread which he will feed the fire.  The green smoke sweetens  his house. The woman sweeps air to banish sadness.  She dusts floors,  polishes objects made of clay and wood. In proportion to what is taken what is given multiplies— the task of something  else to clean. Gleaming appliances  beg to be smudged, breathed upon by small children and large animals  flicking out hope  as she whirls by,  flap of tongue, scratch of paw, sweetly reminding her. The man moves earth,  the woman sweeps air.  Together they pull water  out of the other, pull with the muscular  ache of the living, hauling from the deep  well of the body the rain-swollen, the flame-tipped, the milk-fed— all that cycles through lives moving,  lives sweeping, water  circulating between them  like breath, drawn out of leaves by light.
~~~
Love like a jugler, comes to play his prise,    And all minds draw his wonders to admire,    To see how cuningly hee, wanting eyes,    Can yett deseave the best sight of desire: The wanton child, how hee can faine his fire    So pretely, as none sees his disguise!    How finely doe his tricks, while wee fooles hire    The badge, and office of his tirannies,For in the end, such jugling hee doth make    As hee our harts, in stead of eyes doth take    For men can only by theyr slieghts abuseThe sight with nimble, and delightful skill;    Butt if hee play, his gaine is our lost will:    Yett childlike, wee can nott his sports refuse.
~~~
Other weddings are so shrewd on the sofa, short
and baffled, bassett-legged. All things
knuckled, I have no winter left, in my sore rememory,
to melt down for drinking water. Shrunk down.
Your wedding slides the way wiry dark hairs do, down
a swimming pool drain. So I am drained.
Sincerely. I wish you every chapped bird on this
pilgrimage to hold your hem up from the dust.
Dust is plural: infinite dust. I will sink in the sun,
I will crawl towards the heavy drawing
and design the curtains in the room
of never marrying you. Because it is a sinking,
because today’s perfect weather is a later life’s
smut. This soiled future unplans love.
I keep unplanning the same Sunday. Leg
and flower, breeze and terrier, I have no garden
and couldn’t be happier. Please, don’t lose me
here. I am sorry my clutch is all
tendon and no discipline: the heart is a severed
kind of muscle and alone.
I can hear yours in your room. I hear mine
in another room. In another’s.
~~~
      1
 
an urban image from the eighties
when we hung out at Chez Madam Arthur
and at the back of the room
women wrapped their arms around
nights of ink and dawn
 
 
      2
 
calendar of murmurs
vague caresses about the planet and its water
we could have confused words
but there were doors open
confetti in the midst of darkness
gentle ways
to swoon in a corner with she who
put her tongue in my mouth
 
 
      3
 
focus on yes, on the woman’s
eyelids
caress not silence not word
focus beyond. Hold me back
~~~
The shadows of birds fading on a fighter’s back
 
The undressing of words on an unstamped postcard
 
The wet swings in the distant park
 
The jealousy of raindrops on the umbrella of lovers
 
The laughter of a boy before a bird
 
The song of two flutes, two swords, two bracelets, two fingers
 
The stare of a wave before a pearl
 
The yearning between the legs of a farmer’s wife
 
The opening of doors             closing midday
 
The sudden howling of our muse—and
 les éventails—disturbing the guest inside of us
~~~
They call it sacrifice—            imagine me a tiny poppy
            on a field of green felt—brief blip of color,
                        limitless expanse. I’ve never felt foreign,
or like a lash in his eye. If it’s not love, it’s
                        very like. Most days it feels the same—
            exacting—he tweezes the stray
thoughts from my speech, cleans up my
            heart with a tortoiseshell comb.
Every lady should have such a man,
            edging her lawn with a sharp rotary blade.
                        Year by year—let’s call it always—
            editor and editrix. Engaged
                        against a flurry of typos, showered in
revisionist white out. I erase his crow’s feet,
            buff away his frown. My head—he
yawns it open, scoops out dark foam,
            yesses I’ve regretted, the tiny poppy
everyone sees flapping to pieces—
And so, we are growing taller, sweeter,
ratified in the glow of the big correction.
~~~
For Marilyn who died in January



april 1 
found on our driveway
  like a feather dropped     by a crow
 

  8 of spades,        a playing    card /
 

       we played Crazy Eights, slapping        cards or holding them        as if they were birds that might fly        out of our hands 
decades ago, in our childhood
       like the translucent, whirling        image I imagine, prismatic and phosphorescent —         a murmuration of starlings swooping        and iridescent 
but it dissolved onto a gray wall, undecorated
       / glimpses of us wearing our        velvet Sunday best dresses, yours        usually crimson, mine blue
 

       we never had nice shoes. 
Now you have returned to water
 thanks to the Neptune Society spreading        your ashes over the Pacific
 
 
 april 2
 
Ceylon tea — that amber cup
            from Sri Lanka, popularly known here, before
            Americans became tea drinkers, as
                 Orange Pekoe;
                        our mother hated
                        so many things — 
                                              tea was
                                   rattlesnake venom to
                                                                     her
            I embraced it  ///
            What did you drink, Marilyn? I saw you only
with a Coke or a glass of wine in your hand?
Our mother whom you felt
damaged you / your life       spirals, the twisting iridescent birds
              fly at me now                       scintillating, spinning
                                     I blink
(Our mother drank many cups of coffee with cream a day.)
Our sad mother
                                   I blink
                                   and tell it to go back to our childhood
                                   of muddy little shoes from walking in
                                   the spider-filled orange groves.
There, the damaging must have Begun  / she
                                   loving me so much
                                                                      more
                                                                      than you.
I wish there had been more stories
like the one about the origin of her disliking tea
            at 17, she went to celebrate being made teacher
            of the one-room school she had attended and
            graduated from at her retiring teacher’s
            home, she was served for the first time — tea, she
            being from a German coffee-drinking family.
            Our mother hated it but politely choked it down.
            Would never again touch a drop of the
            poisonous beverage.
From that story, we learned that
our mother ritualized hating something — expected us
to admire her for it.
                        I took
                        that negative pattern
                        and spun it until I could have cloth enough
for an eloquent garment. Perhaps the lesson simply made you
feel yourself            helpless         ragged                      torn
I never
saw you that way, Marilyn,
though perhaps incomplete.
I pour a cup of Assam. Take a sip,
            let it wash through my mouth,
                        down my age-damaged throat,
think
of you sitting
with me in your Southern California 
backyard one May morning
next to the camellia bush.
I, as always with a cup of tea in my hand.
You, smoking.
I left all my family — you were part of it — 
left California and reinvented myself, even
mythologized myself as a tan “California Girl.”
You did not become an artist or a poet.
I suppose that’s why you felt damaged.
If only you knew how much imagination and sacrifice
it took for me to get away.
                        So many small things
                                   can save us
                                             from the damage
you talked of. For me, drinking that
first cup of Orange Pekoe
and making tea
my drink      risking rattlesnake poison
with every steaming cup,
a tiny emblem of a rebellion I still try to practice.
You left us so quickly, Marilyn,
and without any warning this January,
your house full of cancelled aspirations — glass
bowls, and cylinders, and huge globes
filled with sea scallop shells
            you combed the California seashores to 
                        find, collecting these empty shells, washed
free of their biological life.                                 Out of the ocean:
we two different daughters of a sailor.
 
april 3 
The spinning                      the scissors               the measuring
and thus our lives are given out
from the heavens, with unfair allotments
and varied, unaccountable fates,
born when we are, and to whom
you would have prevailed
in an age where women had to spin,
weave the material, cut it into britches and dresses,
undergarments and sheets, sew
and keep clean, warm, and comfortable a
household full or a castle full / men
children, hired hands, maidservants — you would have
done it
so well.
But you would have died young in such a world — 
diabetes, asthma, chronic bronchial infections
even in the 21st century where you lived to be
76       a world where all your skills were plied as
            substitute
for being an artist.
                      When I asked you a year ago,
not knowing that you would die this January,
what you would most like to have, if
money were not the object
             — since clearly all your measuring, cutting, and sewing
            had been for economical reasons,
            not art — 
you thought for a bit, raising your chin.
“A swimming pool in my backyard. One I could
step into every morning, swim, float — maybe in the afternoon
I’d go for a dip. Many evenings, I think,” she said
to me.                     Longing for some ocean? 
In our portrait,
if someone paints it, she will be 
sitting in a scallop shell,
her many jars of seashells behind her head. I
will be invisible, except for the spinning 
murmuration of birds that radiates
            past me. 
They read at her funeral, a poem from her journal
about lying on the beach,
the sand embracing her.
How much she loved it / felt safe,
felt released. Oh, Marilyn, all
those seashells emptied of their living
fleshy occupants. (the ugly parts that die and rot) now
glorious empty rooms
            in which to live an imaginary life,
                        to decorate,
to create beauty, 
            spaces to live
                        a different life.
What is left but your desires, locked in glass, and
an image of you walking
your beloved beaches, hands 
full of seashells, your
footprints measured, then quickly filled 
with the tidal flow.
 
april 4 
my spinning, 
            a whirlpool of faceted moving lights
                        Everything is Numbers!
down into a vortical glare that replaces
            my own mind’s desire 
                        Everything is Numbers! Everything is Numbers!
floating down
            like the crow’s
                        onyx feather
the 8
            of spades
                        random card
appearing
            last week
                        over gravel
8 legs on a spider,
            the arachnid so many people seem to
            fear, yet I lose track of time, stare into the wall
            or any space to replace real images with my imaginary
            ones, some random spider, who spins my fate
Crazy Eights, the child card game Marilyn and I played
pieces of eight, the dollar of
            pirate Spain — our childhood in Orange County
8, a vertical infinity sign
            everything is numbers / your
                        fire opal that Daddy brought
to you from India, and our mother
paid a jeweler to set it
into a ring. You wore the ring
more than sixty years. I suppose it was
on your finger at death
spinning,     spinning
to scintillate and iridesce
            We never had nice shoes.
 
april 5 
Easter Sunday. You and I always dyed
Easter eggs together, our mother busy at
her forty-hour-a-week bookkeeper’s job. I 
was intrigued with the colors,
but they never turned out so bright when
coloring the eggs. You, the artist,
were interested in the designs
to transfer onto the eggs,
cartoons, bunnies,
chicks.
We kept our eggs
separated from each other,
put them in separate bowls, neither
caring for the other’s creation. Still we
felt connected, even joyful, on those few holiday projects.
Not enough to make us friends.
My unwillingness to be like our classmates
embarrassed you. You chose invisibility
in school, rather than being known as “Diane’s
Sister.” 
That unwillingness to be like others 
was what made me a poet. So many little things, but that early decision
of yours, not to understand why I wanted to be weird,
is what made you make so 
many other small choices, preventing you 
from becoming an artist. “Look away,” our mother said to us,
when there were ugly things confronting us. 
I could not do that. You blame
our mother, yet it was you who decided to look away,
even though it meant not seeing the whole world,
even if meant you didn’t become an artist.
Poverty, of course, was the reason
we never had nice shoes.
 
april 6 
All numbers have
disappeared
                        instead
            there are mushrooms
            fungi that has always seemed
            more artful than tasty
            Sipping a cup of tea / soothes me
            as the mushrooms in a veloute sauce
            never could.
            I feel stymied / a rider
            with no horse. I want only to watch
            the stories unfold / the secret stories about why
            you chose to marry and have children / why
            I did not / the stories
                                    I try to banish
            blot out, replace with the diamond
            dog. A murmuration of iridescent starlings, 
            and the spider of eight, 
            twirling on its silk line, projecting infinity      art
            is made when you subject yourself
            to the unacceptable, then dredge
            yourself out,
                                    find a mineral replacement:
            infinity
            iridescer
            irised feather
            scintillater
                        a crystalline body whirls
            releasing me from
            the history, the stories it’s
            so hard to tell.
Until recent years, my sister
and I either ignored or disliked each other.
We fought continuously as children.
I have in my wrist a black bump that
protrudes near a vein.
                                    It’s the point of a pencil
that broke off and penetrated my wrist as we struggled
for the long yellow weapon.
A pencil, the weapon of a writer. But there was 
no bleeding, no seeming-wound to be dressed. 
We never told
our Mother, both too ashamed
of our brutality. I’ve never asked a doctor
about it, the pencil lead encapsulated
in my wrist. Nor ever spoken
of it to anyone.
I always wonder that so much must remain a secret?
Why
            we never had nice shoes.
 
april 7 
Young Marilyn, Old Marilyn.
there are places on this planet where
I find it hard to detect any beauty
therefore, silence
                        No nice shoes.
 
april 8 
there is silence
 
april 9 
Drinking
a blend of traditional
Darjeeling with a touch of Ceylon / this
tea takes me back to a Viennese visit, drinking
this very tea in the afternoon while my friend, Jonathan,
ate their famous Sacher torte.
The tea
seemed particularly aromatic — 
            “lightly scented with oil of bergamot
            and a hint of genuine Bourbon vanilla.”
Wishing for the moment in the past to reappear. I didn’t know
the tea from the Sacher Hotel
was as famous as the cake
                                until I found in my Upton Tea catalogue
                                a listing for “Scented Darjeeling”
                                under the heading “Earl Grey Blends”
This tea,
any cup of tea!
Hard to believe. no! Sad to
think my Mother almost spat out her first taste
of tea.
What worldly thing must I touch to
bring Marilyn back into my
sedate life, my sister Marilyn who died in January? 
Her hand — I’d like to imagine timidly touching her
      hand — Marilyn’s hand.
            Her right hand on which she wore the fire opal ring.
                        In that hand she’d be holding a cigarette.
Smoke and fire makes me think of her — 
            not water, though it was that Pacific ocean 
                        filled with seashells
                                    that she was in touch with. My old hands,
not really like hers at all. She had big hands for shaping things,
            while mine are small,      like birds.
~~~
What seemed a mystery was
in fact a choice. Insert bird for sorrow.   
What seemed a memory was in fact
a dividing line. Insert bird for wind.   
Insert wind for departure when everyone is
standing still. Insert three mountains
burning and in three valleys a signal seer
seeing a distant light and a signal bearer
sprinting to a far-off bell. What seemed
a promise was in fact a sigh.   
What seemed a hot wind, a not quite enough,   
a forgive me, it has flown away, is in fact.   
In the meantime we paint the floors
red. We stroke the sound of certain names
into a fine floss that drifts across our teeth.
We stay in the room we share and listen
all night to what drifts through the window—
dog growl, owl call, a fleet of mosquitoes
setting sail, and down the road,   
the swish of tomorrow’s donkey-threshed grain.
~~~
What is mysterious about loss, flush of arm pulled from a wilted sleeve,summer’s urine-tang in autumn leaves?Let   John Keats light another fag.Or Brontë refuse the doctoron her black sateen settee.For whatever part of   you may be taken away, you said,is the scar I will visit firstwith my mouth, each time, as gold visits the thieved till, sun the obliterated sill, saying praise you for leavingme this you, this living still.
~~~
You have changed me already. I am a fireball
That is hurtling towards the sky to where you are
You can choose not to look up but I am a giant orange ball
That is throwing sparks upon your face
Oh look at them shake
Upon you like a great planet that has been murdered by change
O too this is so dramatic this shaking
Of my great planet that is bigger than you thought it would be
So you ran and hid
Under a large tree. She was graceful, I think
That tree although soon she will wither
Into ten black snakes upon your throat
And when she does I will be wandering as I always am
A graceful lady that is part museum
Of the voices of the universe everyone else forgets
I will hold your voice in a little box
And when you come upon me I won’t look back at you
You will feel a hand upon your heart while I place your voice back
Into the heart from where it came from
And I will not cry also
Although you will expect me to
I was wiser too than you had expected
For I knew all along you were mine
 
 
~~~
I’m jotting down these lines,
having borrowed a pen from a waitress
in this roadside restaurant. Three rusty pines
prop up the sky in the windows.
My soup gets cold, which implies
I’ll eat it cold. Soon I too
will leave a tip on the table, merge
into the beehive of travelers
and board one of the ferries,
where there’s always a line to the loo
and no one knows where the captain is.
Slightly seasick, I keep on writing
of the wind-rose and lobster traps,
seagulls, if any—and there always are.
Check the air and you’ll see them
above straw hats and caps.
The sun at noon glides like a monstrous star-
fish through clouds. Others drink iced tea,
training binoculars on a tugboat.
When I finish this letter, I’ll take a gulp
from the flask you gave me for the road
in days when I was too young to care about
those on the pier who waved goodbye.
I miss them now: cousins in linen dresses,
my mother, you, boys in light summer shirts.
Life is too long. The compass needle dances.
Everything passes by. The ferry passes
by ragged yellow shores.
 
~~~
Evening falls. Someone’s playing a dulcimerNorthampton-style, on the porch out back.Its voice touches and parts the air of summer,as if  it swam to time us down a riverwhere we dive and leave a single trackas evening falls. Someone’s playing a dulcimerthat lets us wash our mix of dreams together.Delicate, tacit, we engage in our act;its voice touches and parts the air of summer.When we disentangle you are not with herI am not with him. Redress calls for tact.Evening falls. Someone’s playing a dulcimerstill. A small breeze rises and the leaves stiras uneasy as we, while the woods go black;its voice touches and parts the air of summerand lets darkness enter us; our strings go slackthough the player keeps up his plangent attack.Evening falls. Someone’s playing a dulcimer;its voice touches and parts the air of summer.
~~~
Waking
on the train, I thought   
we were attacked
            by light:   
chrome-winged birds   
hatching from the lagoon.
            That first day   
the buoys were all   
that made the harbor
            bearable:
pennies sewn into a hemline.   
Later I learned to live in it,
            to walk
through the alien city—
a beekeeper’s habit—
            with fierce light   
clinging to my head and hands.   
Treated as gently as every
            other guest—
each house’s barbed antennae   
trawling for any kind
            of weather—
still I sobbed in a glass box   
on an unswept street
            with the last
few lire ticking like fleas
off my phonecard I’m sorry
            I can’t
stand this, which
one of us do you love?
~~~
Remember me when I am gone away,          Gone far away into the silent land;          When you can no more hold me by the hand, Nor I half turn to go yet turning stay. Remember me when no more day by day          You tell me of our future that you plann'd:          Only remember me; you understand It will be late to counsel then or pray. Yet if you should forget me for a while          And afterwards remember, do not grieve:          For if the darkness and corruption leave          A vestige of the thoughts that once I had, Better by far you should forget and smile          Than that you should remember and be sad.
~~~
You elbow me with your corduroy jacket
when a box chock-full of antique marbles comes up.
I can’t hear your whispers above the auctioneer’s racket.
 
The clipped speech of the auctioneer cracked
me up when you impersonated him in bed. Like a wild, thick mop
I soak up every copper smell from your corduroy jacket.
 
In two days, I will drive you to the airport, packed
with other couples pressed tightly at the top
of the escalator. Lines sear my cheek from your corduroy jacket
 
when we hug—then a quick kiss good-bye tacked
on at the end. I’ll finger the rim on the paper coffee cup
you leave in my car. When I hear your name I can’t forget
 
how your long torso pressed against my bare back,
bluish in this early light. Your fingers shot into me, popped
my spine into a wicked arch. There is no lack
 
of how it haunts me still—what I bid—lost, sacked
and wrapped for other girls. I should have looked up
to see who else was bidding, but I studied the folds in your jacket.
My limit is spent, loud and certain as the auctioneer’s racket.
~~~
after Billie



these vitamin double ds
gonna put cows outta business.
these Sunday bests
if frozen would delight.
unpasteurized & untamed
they swing
in the hammock
of my torso.
they magnetize
my man's hands.
like a Wonder Woman blast
or a web of thunder from
Storm's wrist,
this cocktail
is nurturing napalm
manna dew, Pepto Bismol
for civilization.
you can't outwit these
aureolas.
these nipples are
necrophilia's enemy.
Coltrane couldn't blow
these tumescent tubas.
these are gourds
that'll make a shekere
obsolete,
make an eggplant
go pale.
these breasts
gonna put old Betsy
outta business
& send the men
with goats a-packin.
this love is like a faucet,
it turns on & on.
 
~~~
My Daddy’s forehead is so big, we don’t need a dining roomtable. My Daddy’s forehead so big, his hat size is equator. Sobig, it’s a five-head. Tyra Banks burst into tears when she seenmy Daddy’s forehead. My Daddy’s forehead got its own area code.My Daddy baseball cap got stretch marks. My Daddy pillowcasegot craters. His eyebrows need GPS to find each other. My Daddyforehead lives in two time zones. Planets confuse my Daddy foreheadfor the sun. Couch cushions lose quarters in the wrinkles in my Daddyforehead. My Daddy so smart, he fall asleep with the movie on andwake up soon as the credits start to roll. My Daddy so smart, heperform surgery on his own ingrown toenail. Momma was notimpressed, but my Daddy got brains. My Daddy know exactlyhow to drive me to my friend’s house without lookin at no map.My Daddy born here, he so smart, he know the highways likethe wrinkles in his forehead. He know the free clinics like the grayhairs on his big ass head. My Daddy so smart, he wear a stethoscopeand a white coat. My Daddy drive to work in a minivan only slightlybigger than his forehead, that’s just how my Daddy rolls. My Daddygot swag. My Daddy dance to “Single Ladies” in the hallway.My Daddy drink a small coffee cream and sugar. My Daddydrink a whole can of Red Bull. My Daddy eat a whole packof sour Skittles and never had a cavity. My Daddy so smart,he got a pullout couch in his office. Got a mini fridge there too.Got a cell phone, and a pager, and a email address where I can leavehim messages when he’s not at home. My Daddy’s not home.Momma saves a plate that turns cold.But when my Daddy does come home, he got a officein his bedroom too. Computer screen night light,Momma says she can’t sleep right, but my Daddygot work, my Daddy at work, at home, in the attic,with the TV on, in the dark, from the front yard,through the windows, you can see him working, glassflickering, my house got its own forehead, glinting, sweaty,in the evening, while my Daddy at work, at home,in his own area code,a whole other time zone.
~~~
The Oldest Love Poem(For Susan)



Back from Istanbul, she gives to methe photograph she took insidethe Archaeological Museum’sblue tiled hush, of a tabletcarved in terra cotta from Nippur,written in Sumerian.Delicate etches, a lift of riverbedwhere the summer waters ranglistened on this piece of earththe earnest working hand,a pause between the lines to contemplatecedars’ ornate overhangingleaf-work become inseparablefrom the carving.  Maybe reading sky,reading wind, or tree soundsbeside the sound of clayshaped to carry a human mark.Maybe it says     we are so elegantin our exchange that looking at each otherthe trees whisper their contented greenacross any distance to be herebranches heat-satiatedfull in our veins of holding
~~~
Think Beyoncé’s “Lemonade”



Belle as beast
Eel as style
Bats testy
Best lastly
Bluely astute — 
as bull
as beetle
as Bey
as butte
Beauty as lute
   thus beauty as lush
Late lethal
Lust salty
She’ll eye
She’ll tally
Yes stately yet stealth
Yes steely yet sly
Hey lathe — 
   [she taut]
Hey sleuth — 
   [she tale]
He heel
He that
She bluesy
She ballsy
She byte
She shall
~~~
It wasn't holy so let us not praise gods.
Let us not look to them for bread,
nor the cup that changed water to wine.
Let us look to the bend of the road
that reaches. A silver blur across
the skyline, woman standing on the farm.
In her grasp, the shine that is seed,
that is beginning. She will work
the earth, bounty in the vault
of cosmos above her, heat
lightning that lassoes in its manic
current. Man never existed
but to invite danger. Loveless one.
There was once an army of men,
saluting from bayonet to bomb.
They were expert at sabotage, hand combat.
You stop the clock in your paltry chest.
The one that says choose, choose.
Wind that desired backward. Ring
the alarm. When you wake, no more
pain. A mirror like a window looking out.
What can your past now say to you
that has never been said before? What
of that clock that forbade you to move
 
forward. What of the clock that asked
for nothing but passage, the minutes
careening into you like a fitful arrow.
 
What of the clock that summoned nothing,
not even mercy. Once you tired of wanting,
a face to break, you started the clock again.
~~~
The late Gracie Allen was a very lucid comedienne,
Especially in the way that lucid means shining and bright.
What her husband George Burns called her illogical logic
Made a halo around our syntax and ourselves as we laughed.
George Burns most often was her artful inconspicuous straight man.
He could move people about stage, construct skits and scenes, write
And gather jokes. They were married as long as ordinary magic
Would allow, thirty-eight years, until Gracie Allen's death.
In her fifties Gracie Allen developed a heart condition.
She would call George Burns when her heart felt funny and fluttered
He'd give her a pill and they'd hold each other till the palpitation
Stopped—just a few minutes, many times and pills. As magic fills
Then fulfilled must leave a space, one day Gracie Allen's
               heart fluttered
And hurt and stopped. George Burns said unbelievingly to the doctor,
               "But I still have some of the pills."
 
~~~
I
 
Spawn of fantasies
Sifting the appraisable
Pig Cupid his rosy snout
Rooting erotic garbage
"Once upon a time"
Pulls a weed white star-topped
Among wild oats sown in mucous membrane
I would an eye in a Bengal light
Eternity in a sky-rocket
Constellations in an ocean
Whose rivers run no fresher
Than a trickle of saliva
 
These are suspect places
 
I must live in my lantern
Trimming subliminal flicker
Virginal to the bellows
Of experience
Colored glass.
 
 
 
II
 
At your mercy
Our Universe
Is only
A colorless onion
You derobe
Sheath by sheath
Remaining
A disheartening odour
About your nervy hands
 
 
 
III
 
Night
Heavy with shut-flower's nightmares
---------------------------------------------
Noon
Curled to the solitaire
Core of the
Sun
 
 
 
IV
 
Evolution fall foul of
Sexual equality
Prettily miscalculate
Similitude
 
Unnatural selection
Breed such sons and daughters
As shall jibber at each other
Uninterpretable cryptonyms
Under the moon
 
Give them some way of braying brassily
For caressive calling
Or to homophonous hiccoughs
Transpose the laugh
Let them suppose that tears
Are snowdrops or molasses
Or anything
Than human insufficiences
Begging dorsal vertebrae
 
Let meeting be the turning
To the antipodean
And Form a blur
Anything
Than to seduce them
To the one
As simple satisfaction
For the other
 
 
 
V
 
Shuttle-cock and battle-door
A little pink-love
And feathers are strewn
 
 
 
VI
 
Let Joy go solace-winged
To flutter whom she may concern
 
 
 
VII
 
Once in a mezzanino
The starry ceiling
Vaulted an unimaginable family
Bird-like abortions
With human throats
And Wisdom's eyes
Who wore lamp-shade red dresses
And woolen hair
 
One bore a baby
In a padded porte-enfant
Tied with a sarsenet ribbon
To her goose's wings
 
But for the abominable shadows
I would have lived
Among their fearful furniture
To teach them to tell me their secrets
Before I guessed
-- Sweeping the brood clean out
 
 
 
VIII
 
Midnight empties the street
--- --- --- To the left a boy
--- One wing has been washed in rain
The other will never be clean any more ---
Pulling door-bells to remind
Those that are snug
To the right a haloed ascetic
Threading houses
Probes wounds for souls
--- The poor can't wash in hot water ---
And I don't know which turning to take ---
 
 
 
IX
 
We might have coupled
In the bed-ridden monopoly of a moment
Or broken flesh with one another
At the profane communion table
Where wine is spill't on promiscuous lips
 
We might have given birth to a butterfly
With the daily-news
Printed in blood on its wings
 
 
 
X
 
In some
Prenatal plagiarism
Foetal buffoons
Caught tricks
--- --- --- --- ---
From archetypal pantomime
Stringing emotions
Looped aloft
--- --- --- ---
For the blind eyes
That Nature knows us with
And most of Nature is green
--- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- ---
 
 
 
XI
 
Green things grow
Salads
For the cerebral
Forager's revival
And flowered flummery
Upon bossed bellies
Of mountains
Rolling in the sun
 
 
 
XII
 
Shedding our petty pruderies
From slit eyes
 
We sidle up
To Nature
--- --- --- that irate pornographist
 
 
 
XIII
 
The wind stuffs the scum of the white street
Into my lungs and my nostrils
Exhilarated birds
Prolonging flight into the night
Never reaching --- --- --- --- ------ --- ---
~~~
All master narratives of the mind in a rowboat and the rowboat as beautiful as the swamp
  glowing the dungeon-state lily pads, unfolding like riddles of water, the Plasticine
     heads of amphibians, speckled skin of religious fervor, and the razor-blade weeds.
All master narratives of the body in a rowboat at the bottom of the swamp that has no hands.
All master narratives of the spirit in the rowboat sky reflecting the infant swamp, clouds of filth, soil knotted like tupelos and toppled alphabets.
All master narratives of the skin in a rowboat inside a pine coffin of swamp water.
     All master narratives of thinking like a woman who says,  “I choose inappropriate relationships.”
All master narratives of dramatic structure in the soggy swamp, against the humid flags beating the wind.
All master narratives of mythology like my son saying, “and then he turned into a very big wolf.”
“I think he was very sad.”
“He has feelings too, you know.”
“I think he was sad because he got trapped inside the doors.”
“Oh my god, there are different Fenrirs.”
“Loki’s Fenrir met a different Fenrir.”
“Are wolves part of the cat family?”
“Hey, look up on your phone if they can change forms because these guys look different from the real Fenrir.”
“See that white picture where he’s up on top? He turns huge and tries to eat the sun.”
              “Oh, that’s a tough Fenrir.”
                      “I think he obeys the serpent.”
              “Now that’s sad Fenrir.”
                           “Or maybe Loki turns into the serpent.”
              “Oh, Loki, are you a master of evil?”
“I think they can change forms.”
~~~
We sat across the table.
he said, cut off your hands.
they are always poking at things.
they might touch me.
I said yes.
Food grew cold on the table.
he said, burn your body.
it is not clean and smells like sex.
it rubs my mind sore.
I said yes.
I love you, I said.
That’s very nice, he said
I like to be loved,
that makes me happy.
Have you cut off your hands yet?
~~~
gives joy only if read in a broken rhythm, pausing at every period, parting your lips a little at the colons



What: a pity to die my love. To say: "I don't love you anymore" with no one listening. What: a shame the irritated voice the haste. The distance between the first passionate whisper and this new timbre. How little shame I have. to have killed you and put you here. beneath the very expanse you created. The: expanse. Is: a cloth. Is: white. Is: a sheet. Is: a land on which snow has fallen. Ssh. you'll be alone there. No longer on top. but. under. as is proper for the dead, as is proper for seed. and. for lilies yet to sprout. You'll feel something like moving scratches: those are birds mice my own bony hands that you adored my tongue with its thirst. Brr. love. how. painful for me to see you shrunken by this chill so stripped of your gifts in this tomb where I can't grieve for you but can only dig down to the earth down to its iron to the fire that now embraces the earth and celebrates me.
~~~
At length, by so much importunity press'd,Take, C——, at once, the inside of my breast;This stupid indiff'rence so often you blame,Is not owing to nature, to fear, or to shame:I am not as cold as a virgin in lead,Nor is Sunday's sermon so strong in my head:I know but too well how time flies along,That we live but few years, and yet fewer are young.But I hate to be cheated, and never will buyLong years of repentance for moments of joy,Oh! was there a man (but where shall I findGood sense and good nature so equally join'd?)Would value his pleasure, contribute to mine;Not meanly would boast, nor would lewdly design;Not over severe, yet not stupidly vain,For I would have the power, tho' not give the pain.No pedant, yet learned; no rake-helly gay,Or laughing, because he has nothing to say;To all my whole sex obliging and free,Yet never be fond of any but me;In public preserve the decorum that's just,And shew in his eyes he is true to his trust;Then rarely approach, and respectfully bow,But not fulsomely pert, nor yet foppishly low.But when the long hours of public are past,And we meet with champagne and a chicken at last,May ev'ry fond pleasure that moment endear;Be banish'd afar both discretion and fear!Forgetting or scorning the airs of the crowd,He may cease to be formal, and I to be proud.Till lost in the joy, we confess that we live,And he may be rude, and yet I may forgive.And that my delight may be solidly fix'd,Let the friend and the lover be handsomely mix'd;In whose tender bosom my soul may confide,Whose kindness can soothe me, whose counsel can guide.From such a dear lover as here I describe,No danger should fright me, no millions should bribe;But till this astonishing creature I know,As I long have liv'd chaste, I will keep myself so.I never will share with the wanton coquette,Or be caught by a vain affectation of wit.The toasters and songsters may try all their art,But never shall enter the pass of my heart.I loath the lewd rake, the dress'd fopling despise:Before such pursuers the nice virgin flies:And as Ovid has sweetly in parable told,We harden like trees, and like rivers grow cold.
~~~
There's a place I know where the birds swing low,       And wayward vines go roaming, Where the lilacs nod, and a marble god       Is pale, in scented gloaming. And at sunset there comes a lady fair       Whose eyes are deep with yearning. By an old, old gate does the lady wait       Her own true love's returning. But the days go by, and the lilacs die,       And trembling birds seek cover; Yet the lady stands, with her long white hands       Held out to greet her lover. And it's there she'll stay till the shadowy day       A monument they grave her. She will always wait by the same old gate, —       The gate her true love gave her. 
~~~
We were dancing—it must have
been a foxtrot or a waltz,
something romantic but
requiring restraint,
rise and fall, precise
execution as we moved
into the next song without
stopping, two chests heaving
above a seven-league
stride—such perfect agony,
one learns to smile through,
ecstatic mimicry
being the sine qua non
of American Smooth.
And because I was distracted
by the effort of
keeping my frame
(the leftward lean, head turned
just enough to gaze out
past your ear and always
smiling, smiling),
I didn’t notice
how still you’d become until
we had done it
(for two measures?
four?)—achieved flight,
that swift and serene
magnificence,
before the earth
remembered who we were
and brought us down. ﻿
~~~
In memory D.K., Scrovegni Chapel, Padua




“Even Duccio can’t matchGiotto’s stage management of great tragedy”:Transgendered Professor Y. in leather miniskirtpaces before the screen, wood pointerscraping saint faces, slapping hunched women of the Lamentation. Blue-gold tumult of the chapel walls. After-lunch lecture hall heat. You’re in that class with me. We go on from there—not long. You do The Waste Landin different voices—Come in under the shadowof this red rock
~~~
Outside the Party



Thick throng the snow-flakes, the evening is dreary,Glad rings the music in yonder gay hall;On her who listens here, friendless and weary,Heavier chill than the winter’s doth fall.At yon clear window, light-opened before me,Glances the face I have worshipped so well:There’s the fine gentleman, grand in his glory;There, the fair smile by whose sweetness I fell.This is akin to him, shunned and forsaken,That at my bosom sobs low, without bread;Had not such pleading my marble heart shaken,I had been quiet, long since, with the dead.Oh! Could I enter there, ghastly and squalid,Stand in men’s eyes with my spirit o’erborne,Show them where roses bloomed, crushed now and pallid,What he found innocent, leaving forlorn,—How the fair ladies would fail from their dances,Trembling, aghast at my horrible tale!How would he shrink from my words and my glances!How would they shrink from him, swooning and pale!This is the hair that was soft to enchain him;Snakelike, it snarls on my beautiless brow:These are the hands that were fond to detain himWith a sense-magic then, powerless now!No: could I come, like a ghost, to affright him,How should that heal my wound, silence my pain?Had I the wrath of God’s lightning to smite him,That could not bring me my lost peace again.Ne’er let him grieve while good fortunes betide him,Ne’er count again the poor game lost of old;When he comes forth, with his young bride beside him,Here shall they find us both, dead in the cold.
~~~
for Brandon Goacher



I.
 
Let me speak with expressive
 
hesitation & a feeling for
 
interment why even
 
lineate what isn’t broken by
 
music let me speak with
 
inextricable reluctance.
 
I want to tear the heart
 
from refused convalescence
 
& feed it those long fronds
 
of river bed grass. I want to
 
tear the heart out of style
 
& put it between
 
utter thrall & the infancy
 
of all things impure.
 
Torn out, a flame thickens
 
between us as if
 
not right now we’ll be
 
ripped from this life
 
or each other a white
 
lie not a little more tender
 
than quick. Inextricable
 
reluctance to die or even
 
leave youth culture ever.
 
What a stupid feeling.
 
Do you think it isn’t
 
true? The very existence
 
of flame throwers proves
 
that sometime, somewhere,
 
someone said to themselves
 
‘You know I want to
 
set those people over there
 
on fire but I’m just not
 
close enough to get the
 
job done.’ Someone
 
puts their arms around you
 
in the cold. There’s an al-
 
most disquieting closeness
 
as gossamer clots &
 
becomes an impasto derivative
 
of some newly visible
 
interdependence. Flame
 
throwers then are just
 
a description of prevailing
 
ideology, relics, the life
 
of the party, a soul
 
flirts by burning
 
that name for itself
 
up in jonesing that comes
 
at the end of desire?
 
Well I wouldn’t know
 
about that. A little
 
goat. Why would it
 
nuzzle dreamily up
 
the way I nuzzle dreamily
 
up to my knees. In the
 
‘fatal position’ as my
 
nephew used to call it
 
estranged from play
 
waiting on the fox hunt.
 
Oh baby
 
it beats up my lips
 
the somatic effects
 
of contriving a psychic
 
blockade against death
 
with the contours of your
 
face & healing
 
in constant eclipse
 
where all things
 
inextricably broken by
 
music make the basic
 
rhythmic unit go
 
something like this — I
 
don’t want to loose you. I
 
don’t want to be
 
empty, clever hold &
 
keep you. I was lost
 to you to start with still
 I keep on coming back.
 
Do you think you’ll
 
keep on coming back to me
 
forever? That’s the meaning
 of our life together
 baby.
~~~
When I found your face on a pillow of leaves
you had already erased it. A nest so heavy
can stay in the heavens only by reversal.
 
By this law the knees are laced with abandon.
 
I said to the young man.
 
If watching is the manufacturer, and I lose you
what angel takes the place of a dowry
or distance in this leaf action?
 
 
 
 Subject to like passions as we are
my soul herself, myself
a possession I could not
mistake for the man
(his language and Latin)
yet we are “taken to”
a love passage
I had hardly noticed
in the late talk of money
The work of love and the work of art
has no sleeping part
Is a drop of light
in a small silver socket,
a rosy dime
in a daylight tryst
Is a keeper and no spender
As seeing who is invisible:
a kind of flaxen thing
caught in stone
I obeyed and read further
“I am hemmed”
Though my heart were a pear tree
threaded with fire
Lion you leapt through me
like fineness in the boundary gene
 
 
 
 
Conductor you knit me
as isthmus     Can I touch it
Night is going 200 miles an hr
as usual     In this way we find
we are suddenly altered
If I were a day would you
like me better     Where were you
you who in a bath changed meHow to be walking
is a glorious porthole
Must I insist on an absence
more foolish and secret
When your timber’s a forest
I can’t see for the tree in my bed
Gentle captive, it is
a larger than murder
we tender     Fond and afire
my style and my anchor
Master there’s a boat for no
lesser completion than
beauty’s sweetest dress
when you look on me kind
Who am I to stop this flowing
Least of all that home mile
Sinking in the real
I dreamed there was a further island
Perhaps (how I thought you)
to salt that harness with pleasure
 
 
 
 
Lovely hero where the lovely hero bounds
an acre hidden between eros and its errors
Finding a dozen darts beneath the skin of
Watching the wire of a skinny flame
No other lovely hero found the back
behind her secret form of symmetry
Her gleaming difference
Her schoolish way in pretty understandings
Said   Not done   Not said   Undone
Wealthy sadness has a way of winning everyone
This is the end of my body as you know it
its superfluous penchant for love
its poorer costume, its shiny disaster
 
 
 
 
What is a maiden,
                         boatswain,
but a fiery lair
and a teary citadel
By the smallest shipwreck
a daughter is laughter
Yet equaled
                         as in a fable
this Gibraltar goes headlong
in a just king’s love
See how his hands
are her mercy
and measure
her number and rescue
O Perseus
    Pythagoras
    Pierre
my Pierre
 
 
 
 
What rules a body’s buried factions
when laundered by morning
 
When called by our names
although we are invisible
 
Sleeping I forget my animal
When the animal comes
I’m forgotten because of it
 
How was it called
in its own country
 
crossing a street
in order to come inside
 
~~~
I’m through! I’m through!she says and resays.The years pass.Her feathers gray.Her eggs lay themselvesless frequently. The sky falls.
~~~
When Americans say a man
takes liberties, they mean
he’s gone too far. In Philadelphia today I saw
a kid on a leash look mom-ward
and announce his fondest wish: one
bicentennial burger, hold
the relish. Hold is forget,
in American.
On the courts of Philadelphia
the rich prepare
to serve, to fault. The language is a game as well,
in which love can mean nothing,
doubletalk mean lie. I’m saying
doubletalk with me. I’m saying
go so far the customs are untold.
Make nothing without words,
and let me be
the one you never hold.
~~~
I really fucked up. My E-flat key was loose. I only got a few hours of sleep the night before because Robyn and I were on the phone. They gave me the wrong repertoire list. How was I to know that high altitude affects clarinet reeds? I ran out of beta blockers. I forgot to bring a water bottle. I was worried that they’d hire that asshole who they don’t like because he threatened to blackball them at the union meeting. The acoustics were terrible. The second violinist used a new rosin and that threw her off, which unnerved me. My tinnitus roared the whole time. Robyn auditioned right before me. Just as I blew the first note, it dawned on me that Robyn might be sleeping with the conductor. Someone backstage slammed a door and I had to start all over again. The concertmaster doesn’t know a trumpet from a trombone, but since he’s powerful in a certain tiny corner of the music world everyone feels forced to curry favor with him. I forgot to eat. The audition committee talked the whole time. A clang in the heating system was near deafening. My carpal tunnel flared up. My neck twinges flared up. My arthritis flared up. I only got a few hours of sleep. I would have won the last competition, except that the concertmaster’s student was appointed with no audition, so I kept wondering if the same thing would happen again. I forgot I wasn’t playing the flute. I only got a few hours of sleep because Robyn and I were on the phone all night and decided to end our marriage. I really fucked up.
~~~
for Richard



Before the days of self service,
when you never had to pump your own gas,
I was the one who did it for you, the girl
who stepped out at the sound of a bell
with a blue rag in my hand, my hair pulled back
in a straight, unlovely ponytail.
This was before automatic shut-offs
and vapor seals, and once, while filling a tank,
I hit a bubble of trapped air and the gas
backed up, came arcing out of the hole
in a bright gold wave and soaked me — face, breasts,
belly and legs. And I had to hurry
back to the booth, the small employee bathroom
with the broken lock, to change my uniform,
peel the gas-soaked cloth from my skin
and wash myself in the sink.
Light-headed, scrubbed raw, I felt
pure and amazed — the way the amber gas
glazed my flesh, the searing,
subterranean pain of it, how my skin
shimmered and ached, glowed
like rainbowed oil on the pavement.
I was twenty. In a few weeks I would fall,
for the first time, in love, that man waiting
patiently in my future like a red leaf
on the sidewalk, the kind of beauty
that asks to be noticed. How was I to know
it would begin this way: every cell of my body
burning with a dangerous beauty, the air around me
a nimbus of light that would carry me
through the days, how when he found me,
weeks later, he would find me like that,
an ordinary woman who could rise
in flame, all he would have to do
is come close and touch me.
~~~
 
 it befalls us. an exchanged glance, reflective spasm. 
Is it a fantastically unlaminated question set in flesh
or valentine that wears the air as its apparel?
If you cut a heart from parchment, is it still
a heart? A nontrivial knot, where turns of every gradient
may kiss and tell. Does the vessel have edges?
Or is it all connectedness, an embedding to be stretched
or bent. Imagine being simultaneously alive,
bound in both directions with a bow! Is it diachronic,
a phenomenon that changes over time? Without ardor
theory suffers. That’s why I’m stuck on you with wanton glue, per-
severing, styling something blobbish and macabre
into something pointed, neat. Love is a gift
that springs from an unlit spot. Resin and rue.
Even when I’m in the dark I’m in the dark with you.
 
 say it quivers rather than contracts, fluttery with ruptions. 
Doctors call it holiday heart. Valentine’s Day — 
named for a saint whose head is venerated in Rome — 
is also National Organ Donor Day, okay?
Give anatomical dark chocolates infused with true
invariance. With smoked salt pepper and beau-
jolais in a plain brown box embellished with praises
in a romance language in your hand. Please
none cosseted in plush like the stuff inside
a coffin. I’m just praying. Can you find a pulse
or dry needle trigger point? Just saying
this fudge has tears in it. Someone’s been sweating
over this. Listen, Mr. Stethoscope, I’m at the end
of my hope. Still, I’ll grow another
blossom for that blossom-crowned skull.
 
 
some give vinegar valentines. no pillow words. 
Just floppy organ thistleburr. Froot Loops and craft
wire fashioned on a snarky jig: “To My Pocket Prince.”
“By Bitch Possessed.” Tough tits, isn’t it? Some call it a day
marked by commodified flowers, obligation chocolate.
Some live on clinical sprinkles, asking where’s the feast.
The carnelian pin with openwork components
that let you see its self-pleasuring mechanism, storm
hormones, and single pulsing vein. What even is it?
Here’s the thing. A gift cannot be cynical
unless the giver is. I will pay you to test this
for me. Its closets vast with steadfastness at best
at least for me surpass all other closets in the flesh.
I’m sending this from my memory foam head.
Valentines intensify the surface, heart the depths.
~~~
The nights have grown cool again, like the nights
of early spring, and quiet again. Will
speech disturb you? We're
alone now; we have no reason for silence.
Can you see, over the garden—the full moon rises.
I won't see the next full moon.
In spring, when the moon rose, it meant
time was endless. Snowdrops
opened and closed, the clustered
seeds of the maples fell in pale drifts.
White over white, the moon rose over the birch tree.
And in the crook, where the tree divides,
leaves of the first daffodils, in moonlight
soft greenish-silver.
We have come too far together toward the end now
to fear the end. These nights, I am no longer even certain
I know what the end means. And you, who've been with a man—
after the first cries,
doesn't joy, like fear, make no sound?
~~~
From a story of how the tobacco plant came to our people, told to me by my cousin George Coser Jr.



It was way back, before there was a way back
When time threaded earth and sky.
Children were conceived, were born, grew, and walked tall
In what we now call a day.
There must have been two suns, a bright moon, somehow
We had more light than now, sheen
Of falling in love playing about Earth’s body
In a wild flicker which lit
Us up. We who were this planet and yearned for touch.
Every planted thought grew plant
Ladders to the stars, way back, before there was
No way back, Miss Mary Mack.
We used to sing along the buttons of her
Dress. Our babies are always
Our babies. Even back then when time waved through
The corn. We knew our plants like
Relatives. Their stories were our stories, there
Were songs for everything — I
Should say “are” songs for every transformation
They link between way back and
Now, the forever now, a time when a young
Mvskoke man and woman
Walked through the shimmer of the early evening.
They had become as one song.
They lay down when it was dark. I can hear their
Intimate low-voice talking.
How they tease one another with such gut love.
Earth makes a bed, with pillow
Mounds. And it is there as the night insects sing
They conceived their first child. They
Will look back as they walk East toward the sunrise.
The raw stalks of beginning
Will drink the light, root deeply dark into earth.
In the tracks of their loving
The plant-child emerges, first the seed head, then
Leafy, long male body and the white female
Flowers of tobacco, orHece, as the people called it when it called
To them. Come here. We were brought
To you from those who love you. We will help you.
~~~
Pity me not because the light of day
At close of day no longer walks the sky;
Pity me not for beauties passed away
From field and thicket as the year goes by;
Pity me not the waning of the moon,
Nor that the ebbing tide goes out to sea,
Nor that a man’s desire is hushed so soon,
And you no longer look with love on me.
This have I known always: Love is no more
Than the wide blossom which the wind assails,
Than the great tide that treads the shifting shore,
Strewing fresh wreckage gathered in the gales:
Pity me that the heart is slow to learn
What the swift mind beholds at every turn.
~~~
They were not traditionalists.
They could bear the innovations
               of plot. They could not
wait to landscape the plot. They had plans
                              for a bed of pansies because pansies
                              hardly ever die
                                                            in a cold snap,
                              because pansies are hardy despite the name.
When they shoved the trowel
                                             into the soil
it was with his hand
                                             on the handle and hers                                                                            adding force.
They knew there were only
                                                            nine types of people in the world
and they knew which ones
would close the deal. They knew
the shirkers by sight.
                                             They had options.
They knew about Required Communication.
                              About how I feel and you feel.
When there was a question
                                             of who did the dishes
                                             and who did the cat box,
                                             it was settled in-house
                              and never required an outside contractor.
But the pansies got stem spot, leaf rot, and mildew.
When they looked at their options
               it seemed there weren’t really that many
                                                                                            after all.
They swore to uphold the bonds
                                                      and the principles
                                                      and the yelling.
They swore to oral sex.
They dressed to the nines and they walked the aisle.
They stood up and received the standard narration.
~~~
Two rooms, the Aegean, 2008, there lived a rhapsode and his wife. When they ate, they ate straight from the vine. Her curves, sibilance,Serbo-Croatian chants. His chants, curves of clocks, burnished bells. When they ate, they boiled wings and gills.Nights, slate olives, he couldn’t see.
~~~
I regard your affections, find your teeth have
left me a bruise necklace. Those lipstick
      marks leech a trail, ear to ear, facsimile your
smile. Your 40 ounces of malt liquor, your
shrink hate, your eyes dialing 911. The hearts
you draw with ballpoint on my cigarette packs
      when I've left the room, penned in your girl's
cursive, look demented, misshapen approximations
of what I refuse to hand over. It's a nice touch,
      though: a little love to accompany the cancer.
      My thought follows you to where you spend
your days lying in bed, smoking and reading
the Beats. The accumulation of clothes and ashes
      circles you, rising like a moat after rainfall.
Often you are a study in detachment—the trigger
eye is your eye, still as a finger poised to press
      should one refuse to cooperate, and I wonder
      how you can hate men so much when you think
like one. Think of what I could be doing outside
if I could unlock the door of myself: think bikini,
      think soda fountain, think tradition, a day lacking
entirely your brand of ambivalence. If you were
a number, I'd subtract you; if you were a sentence,
      I'd rewrite you. Are you the one who left these
      wilted flowers, are you the one whose PIN spells
out H-O-L-E? Why are you wearing my clothes?
If you are weather, then I am a town, closing down
      at word of your coming: you're a glacier on fast
forward, you're direct as a detour, when I say
good-bye you move in next door. You say you
      want to have my baby, you want to buy me a car,
      and you're too young to enter a bar. I should tether
you to a tree in the dark park, allow the moon to stroke
your white neck. I should give you a diamond collar,
      walk you around the block and show you off.
~~~
She has attained the permanence
She dreamed of, where old stones lie sunning.
Untended stalks blow over her
Even and swift, like young men running.
Always in the heart she loved
Others had lived,—she heard their laughter.
She lies where none has lain before,
Where certainly none will follow after.
~~~
ix
There I was, all spread out for the taking,
bloomed wings waiting for winter
sleet. It was a long season of drinking whole
creeks and nothing else. We churned desert
into desert. What I’m saying is, neither the desert
rat nor damselfly can bear the nosebleeds: shoal-
laced face bearing down just in time to overwinter.
There I was, all spread out for the taking.
In truth, nobody wants water this thin.
One swallow, and we’re off to dig for more within
a hollow womb. This morning we sip water,
discussing the trauma in our blood: saltwater — 
there it rests, in droplets, on my breast skin,
“Oh,” I say. “My tears,” rubbing them deep within.xi
At church I sat salvaged: I said to send me
away wearing nothing but satin and lace.
We both felt secondhand. It was knee-
length, and it wore me cheap. I couldn’t embrace
the old woman who once wore it, couldn’t see
my wrists even. And my neck, it was braced
up all in lace. The woman next to me says,
“How beautiful.” I say, “This beautiful,” then split
a hair down the middle. I lied, “I made it myself,”
then stood up to fade through painstaking
humiliation. As a child, a girl, I saw through myself
to age 45. It was then when I first noticed the aching
of my hands, how they were soon to set themselves
away — they came and went, as if they were lace for the breaking.xiii
I was reciting Alfred, Lord Tennyson on my back,
in a canoe, floating the holiest way I knew — 
so close to ghost, and went pale for a moment
before finding myself wandering among high pines.
I didn’t expect to emerge in white already
with my heart in his hand, just as normal
as a shell rests on my chest. Didn’t expect
to hand it over so early on, at the boundary
of our properties in a dream: in the grasses
where he ended and I began. I’m feeling very still
now that we’ve crossed over into the pale,
where we are soon to thread, soon to embellish,
then loop back into each other: braided the way
we were taught to approach each other — the same way.
~~~
If by real you mean as real as a shark tooth stuck
in your heel, the wetness of a finished lollipop stick,
the surprise of a thumbtack in your purse—
then Yes, every last page is true, every nuance,
bit, and bite. Wait. I have made them up—all of them—
and when I say I am married, it means I marriedall of them, a whole neighborhood of past loves.
Can you imagine the number of bouquets, how many
slices of cake? Even now, my husbands plan a great meal
for us—one chops up some parsley, one stirs a bubbling pot
on the stove. One changes the baby, and one sleeps
in a fat chair. One flips through the newspaper, another
whistles while he shaves in the shower, and every single
one of them wonders what time I am coming home.
~~~
                           this is
                          exactly
                       the kind
                       of space
                      I want to
           follow you into
      holding your little
mute worm on a twig
make it marble
make it touch like tough winter
in the next life we will have longer love
better places with extended embraces
now we leave the song to return to the front
    leaf closing on closeness of
    mothers in the next worldoverseeing premiumwaste of the planetreincarnateanywherebut here
   land on a different rim
~~~
The whole trick of this thing    ...    is to get out of your own light.                       — Marianne Faithfull



She said she sang very close to the miketo change the space. And I changed the spaceby striding down the Boulevard Raspail at dusk in tight jeansuntil an Algerian engineer plucked the pen from my back pocket.As if you’re inside my head and you’re hearing the song from in there.He came from the desert, I camefrom green suburbs. We understoodnothing of one another over glasses of metallic red wine.I was playing Girl. He playedMan. Several plots were afoot, allmisfiring. One had to do with my skimpy black shirtand light hair, his broad shoulders and hungerafter months on an oil rig. Anotherwas untranslatable. Apollinaireburned his fingers on June’s smoldering lyrebut I had lost my pen. The engineerread only construction manuals. His roomwas dim and narrow and no,the story didn’t slide that way though there are many waysto throw oneself away.One singer did it by living by a broken walluntil she shredded her voice but still she offered each song,she said, like an Appalachian artifact.Like trash along the riverbank chafing at the quayplastic bottles a torn shirt fractured dollsthrough which the current chortles an intimate tune.
~~~
      to be
                              gone a
                  constant desire
         embarrassed for the    
   giant leaning in for love
   we had enough
of
   the dance number but                   the whirling begins
  it just starts   silos full of air   no more corn   no more wheat  watching myself for  full details in a strange man’s pants  we let
            the soldier board the plane
              shot in head three days later
               why are you angry you said
                 why are you not I said
~~~
For Fred



I could pick anything and think of you—  This lamp, the wind-still rain, the glossy blue  My pen exudes, drying matte, upon the page.  I could choose any hero, any cause or age  And, sure as shooting arrows to the heart,  Astride a dappled mare, legs braced as far apart  As standing in silver stirrups will allow—  There you'll be, with furrowed brow  And chain mail glinting, to set me free:  One eye smiling, the other firm upon the enemy.  This post-postmodern age is all business: compact disks  And faxes, a do-it-now-and-take-no-risks  Event. Today a hurricane is nudging up the coast,  Oddly male: Big Bad Floyd, who brings a host  Of daydreams: awkward reminiscences  Of teenage crushes on worthless boys  Whose only talent was to kiss you senseless.  They all had sissy names—Marcel, Percy, Dewey;  Were thin as licorice and as chewy,  Sweet with a dark and hollow center. Floyd's  Cussing up a storm. You're bunkered in your  Aerie, I'm perched in mine  (Twin desks, computers, hardwood floors):  We're content, but fall short of the Divine.  Still, it's embarrassing, this happiness—  Who's satisfied simply with what's good for us,  When has the ordinary ever been news?  And yet, because nothing else will do  To keep me from melancholy (call it blues),  I fill this stolen time with you.
~~~
Oh! yet one smile, tho' dark may lower 
Around thee clouds of woe and ill, 
Let me yet feel that I have power, 
Mid Fate's bleak storms, to soothe thee still. 
Tho' sadness be upon thy brow, 
Yet let it turn, dear love, to me, 
I cannot bear that thou should'st know 
Sorrow I do not share with thee. 
True love's wreath is of mountain flowers, 
They stand the storm and brave the blast, 
And blossom on, so love like ours 
Is sweetest when all else is past. 
Too well I know what storms have frowned, 
And now frown on life's troubled tide; 
Still darker let them gather round, 
They have no power on hearts so tried. 
Then say not that you may not bear, 
To shadow spirit light as mine; 
I shall not shrink, or fear to share 
The darkest fate if it be thine!
 
 Oh! say not love was never made 
For heart so light as mine; 
Must love then seek the cypress shade, 
Rear but a gloomy shrine. 
Oh! say not, that for me more meet 
The revelry of youth; 
Or that my wild heart cannot beat 
With deep devoted truth. 
Tho' mirth may many changes ring, 
'Tis but an outward show, 
Even upon the fond dove's wing 
Will varying colours glow. 
Light smiles upon my lip may gleam 
And sparkle o'er my brow, 
'Tis but the glisten of the stream 
That hides the gold below. 
'Tis love that gilds the mirthful hour, 
That lights the smile for me, 
Those smiles would instant lose their power, 
Did they not glance on thee!
 
 Oh! come to my slumber 
Sweet dreams of my love, 
I have hung the charmed wreath 
My soft pillow above. 
The roses are linked 
In a chain pure and white; 
And the rose-leaves are wet 
With the dew drops of night. 
The moon was on high 
As I gather'd each flower; 
The dew that then falls 
Has a magical power. 
The Spirit of slumber 
Those roses has blest; 
And sweet are the visions 
They'll bring to my rest. 
Be their spell on my soul, 
So they let me but see 
His dark eyes flash in love 
And his smile glance on me. 
Let sleep bring the image 
Of him far away; 
'Tis worth all the tears 
I shed for him by day. 
I have hung the charmed wreath 
My soft pillow above; 
Then come to my slumber, 
Sweet dreams of my love!
 
 
How vain to cast my love away 
On bosom false as thine; 
The floweret's bloom, that springs in May, 
Would be a safer shrine 
To build my fondest hopes upon, 
Tho' fragile it may be. 
That flower's smile is not sooner gone 
Than love that trusts to thee. 
Love asks a calm, a gentle home, 
Or else its life is o'er; 
If once you let its pinions roam, 
Oh! then 'tis love no more. 
The aspin's changefuI shade can be 
No shelter for the dove; 
And hearts as varying as that tree, 
Are sure no place for love. 
Hope linger'd long and anxiously, 
O'er failing faith, but now 
I give thee back each heartless sigh, 
Give back each broken vow. 
I'll trust the stay of tulip dyes, 
The calm of yon wild sea, 
The sunshine of the April skies, 
But never more to thee! 
 
 Oh! would that love had power to raise 
A little isle for us alone, 
With fairy flowers, and sunny rays, 
The blue sea wave its guardian zone. 
No other step should ever press 
This hidden Eden of the heart, 
And we would share its loveliness, 
From every other thing apart. 
The rose and violet should weep, 
Whene'er our leafy couch was laid, 
The lark should wake our morning sleep, 
The bulbul sing our serenade. 
And we would watch the starry hours, 
And call the moon to hear our vows, 
And we would cull the sweetest flowers, 
And twine fresh chaplets for our brows. 
 
 
I thought thus of the flowers, the moon, 
This fairy isle for you and me; 
And then I thought how very soon 
How very tired we should be.
 
                   Matrimonial Creed.
HE must be rich whom I could love, 
His fortune clear must be, 
Whether in land or in the funds, 
'Tis all the same to me. 
He must be old whom I could love, 
Then he'll not plague me long; 
In sooth 'twill he a pleasant sight,
To see him borne along 
To where the croaking ravens lurk, 
And where the earth worms dwell: 
A widow's hood will suit my face,
And black becomes me well. 
And he must make a settlement, 
I'll have no man without; 
And when he writes his testament, 
He must not leave me out. 
Oh! such a man as this would suit 
Each wish I here express; 
If he should say, — Will you have me? 
I'll very soon say — Yes! ⁠
 
~~~
I take off my shirt, I show you.
I shaved the hair out under my arms.
I roll up my pants, I scraped off the hair   
on my legs with a knife, getting white.
My hair is the color of chopped maples.   
My eyes dark as beans cooked in the south.   
(Coal fields in the moon on torn-up hills)
Skin polished as a Ming bowl
showing its blood cracks, its age, I have hundreds   
of names for the snow, for this, all of them quiet.
In the night I come to you and it seems a shame   
to waste my deepest shudders on a wall of a man.
You recognize strangers,
think you lived through destruction.
You can’t explain this night, my face, your memory.
You want to know what I know?   
Your own hands are lying.
~~~
Close to thedoor inmy dream thesmall signsI saw a brownsign with wisdomon itI saw a brownone leaningwith wisdomon itfringe of a mirrormy mother leaning over a pondcupping waterleaning againstthe mouldingcardboard or wood which materials do youdoes your wisdom preferwhich a-partment in a summerwith someone I felt brave tohave touched her love the screendoor and the dogsand the cats alwaysgetting out. Thatwas the feartwo signsfading but recallingthey had faded like wordsfade in stone becauseof the rain and the daysand waking and the dreamis leaving with everystep leaning over the meatbecause I do not want you to have died in vainkissing the turkey and the neck of  my dogall animals am I. all dreams, all stoneall message am I.
~~~
And ye shall walk in silk attire,
  And siller hae to spare,Gin ye’ll consent to be his bride,
   Nor think o’ Donald mair.O wha wad buy a silken goun
   Wi’ a poor broken heart!Or what’s to me a siller croun,
   Gin frae my love I part!The mind wha’s every wish is pure
   Far dearer is to me;And ere I’m forc’d to break my faith,
   I’ll lay me down an’ dee!For I hae pledg’d my virgin troth
   Brave Donald’s fate to share;And he has gi’en to me his heart,
   Wi’ a’ its virtues rare.His gentle manners wan my heart,
   He gratefu’ took the gift;Could I but think to seek it back,
   It wad be waur than theft!For langest life can ne’er repay
   The love he bears to me;And ere I’m forc’d to break my troth,
   I’ll lay me doun an’ dee.
~~~
O, she says (because she loves to say O),
~~~
Dear sip, dear shotgun, dear pound:
beneath the house, the kegs roll in;
the party flips its switches down.
When drunk comes, it comes as sound,
a chord, a liftoff. I ride the rim,
dear sip, dear shotgun, dear pound.
He could be anyone, and he abounds.
I slip inside a dance with him.
The party flips its switches down.Let’s go, he says, upstairs now.
My cup spills. My shirt is skin.
Dear sip, dear shotgun, dear pound,
I won’t. Get lucky. Get found.
But kegs run out, the hour brims,
the party flips its switches down,
his hips to mine, his arms around,
a song ends, and dark begins—
dear sip, dear shotgun, dear pound,
the party flips its switches down.
~~~
If by truth you mean hand then yes
I hold to be self-evident and hold you in the highest—
KO to my OT and bait to my switch, I crown
you one-trick pony to my one-horse town,
dub you my one-stop shopping, my space heater,
juke joint, tourist trap, my peep show, my meter reader,
you best batteries-not-included baring all or
nothing. Let me begin by saying if he hollers,
end with goes the weasel. In between,
cream filling. Get over it, meaning, the moon.
Tell me you’ll dismember this night forever,
you my punch-drunking bag, tar to my feather.
More than the sum of our private parts, we are some
peekaboo, some peak and valley, some
bright equation (if and then but, if er then uh).
My fruit bat, my gewgaw. You had me at no duh.
~~~
Gushing from the mouths of stone men
To spread at ease under the sky
In granite-lipped basins,
Where iris dabble their feet
And rustle to a passing wind,
The water fills the garden with its rushing,
In the midst of the quiet of close-clipped lawns.
Damp smell the ferns in tunnels of stone,   
Where trickle and plash the fountains,   
Marble fountains, yellowed with much water.
Splashing down moss-tarnished steps   
It falls, the water;
And the air is throbbing with it;
With its gurgling and running;
With its leaping, and deep, cool murmur.
And I wished for night and you.
I wanted to see you in the swimming-pool,   
White and shining in the silver-flecked water.
While the moon rode over the garden,   
High in the arch of night,
And the scent of the lilacs was heavy with stillness.
Night and the water, and you in your whiteness, bathing!
~~~
First turn to me after a shower,
you come inside me sideways as always
in the morning you ask me to be on top of you,   
then we take a nap, we’re late for school
you arrive at night inspired and drunk,   
there is no reason for our clothes
we take a bath and lie down facing each other,   
then later we turn over, finally you come
we face each other and talk about childhood
as soon as I touch your penis I wind up coming
you stop by in the morning to say hello
we sit on the bed indian fashion not touching
in the middle of the night you come home   
from a nightclub, we don’t get past the bureau
next day it’s the table, and after that the chair
because I want so much to sit you down & suck your cock
you ask me to hold your wrists, but then when I   
touch your neck with both my hands you come
it’s early morning and you decide to very quietly   
come on my knee because of the children
you’ve been away at school for centuries, your girlfriend   
has left you, you come four times before morning
you tell me you masturbated in the hotel before you came by   
I don’t believe it, I serve the lentil soup naked
I massage your feet to seduce you, you are reluctant,   
my feet wind up at your neck and ankles
you try not to come too quickly   
also, you dont want to have a baby
I stand up from the bath, you say turn around   
and kiss the backs of my legs and my ass
you suck my cunt for a thousand years, you are weary   
at last I remember my father’s anger and I come
you have no patience and come right away
I get revenge and won’t let you sleep all night
we make out for so long we can’t remember how   
we wound up hitting our heads against the wall
I lie on my stomach, you put one hand under me   
and one hand over me and that way can love me
you appear without notice and with flowers   
I fall for it and we become missionaries
you say you can only fuck me up the ass when you are drunk   
so we try it sober in a room at the farm
we lie together one night, exhausted couplets
and don’t make love. does this mean we’ve had enough?
watching t.v. we wonder if each other wants to   
interrupt the plot; later I beg you to read to me
like the Chinese we count 81 thrusts   
then 9 more out loud till we both come
I come three times before you do
and then it seems you’re mad and never will
it’s only fair for a woman to come more   
think of all the times they didn’t care
~~~
A man can give up so much, can limit himself to handwritten correspondence, to foods made of whole grains, to heat from a woodstove, logs hewn by his own hand and stacked neatly like corpses by the backdoor.He can play nocturnes by heart. They will not make the beloved appear. He can learn the names of all the birds in the valley. Not one will be enticed to learn his.
~~~
Because Yosemite’s high altitude lake’s              tadpoles wash up in                         glow-in-the-dark condoms             and every fish lip has a hook in it. Because                              there’s bird shit                             in the clouds. Things catch, get caught.                                         Things are consumed.                              There’s no looking                                        back. And so you                                        were conceived here, Ezekiel, fifty                              feet off the Trail of                         Broken Ankles. We wanted                   to make sure no one                              would see. The one hiker                                         who saw looked away.                                          Amino acids                                         of the flushed cheek. Dirge                                                    for eyeless things. I washed                                                   my body in the river                                                              and the river went numb—                                                   the mind sunburned.                                                    I imagine the second                                                   before you took, before                                                       the cells began to split,                                                   before that flint                                                   was struck, before the dna                                                             began to twist,                                         that a colorless emptiness                           suddenly inverted                    and told the world that he, too,                                        once had a mother.                                          But there is no nest of leaves. Nothing                                         stops. The clock in the glacier                                         still ticks above us                              and on our skin                   there were enormous ants, the segments                               of their bodies                                 like black droplets of paint                                                pushed very close against each other                                                      but still not touching, yet                                                      taking their work with them—                                                      taking away their dirt world.
~~~
Stepping over the stones of my mother,
chicken bones, straw,
 
the cellar in which the man was found,
that man my grandfather
 
the day the sharecroppers left town,
their son shot dead —
 
the thing whiskey’ll do to a man.
 
The woman who waited under the house at night,
counting ghosts and bobcats through lattice of leaves,
 
walking bare-boned lanes,
toes buried beneath blackened leaves —
 
no cause for worry
if you’ve walked every acre, planted every row.
 
Nothing can get you if you pay it no mind.
 
I tell you these things
so you’ll not mistake my actions for fear,
 
not think I do not know what makes a life,
what makes people do the things they do.
 
I know my fears — I’ve named them,
counted them out one by one
 
like tarot cards, voodoo dolls:
 
birth,
death,
poverty,
obscurity,
that you will leave me,
or I will leave you.
~~~
In my heart the old love  
 Struggled with the new,  It was ghostly waking  
 All night through.   Dear things, kind things  
 That my old love said,  Ranged themselves reproachfully  
 Round my bed.   But I could not heed them,  
 For I seemed to see  Dark eyes of my new love  
 Fixed on me.   Old love, old love,  
 How can I be true?  Shall I be faithless to myself  
 Or to you?
~~~
I try to think of the cup of a hand,  of legs in a tangle, and not the thistle  though even it, purpled, spiking away,  wants to be admired, wants to say, whistle  a little for me. O every little thing wants to be loved, wants to be marked by the cry  that brings desire to it, even blue-eyed fly  to the bloated hiss of death. To love is to be remiss:  the horse alone in the wide flat field nods its head as if the bridle and bit were missed  or mocked; the cow slung with the unmilked weight  of her tremendous teats shoots a look back over her shoulder  at O lonesome me. I want to say to her need            as if crooning could be enough,  sweet, sweet mama . . . truth be told,  the thousand lisping bees to the milkweeds' honey  terrifies me. When the stink of slurry season  is over and the greened fields are slathered, fecund,  overtall foxgloves tip with the weight of their fruit.  Then I dream a little dream of you  and me, curled like two grubs on the top of a leaf  wind-driven and scudding along the lake's surface.  All night we glide to its blue harbor  and back again. The fattened slack of us  singing O darlin' darlin'  darlin'.
~~~
It’s a wave, isn’t it? Not a particle.

A fresh, cool wave, so why am I flushed

and not washed? Why dirtier than before?

 

 

1. Etymology

 

On the subject of our names.

They’re so embracing,

thinking they’re all us

 

and swallowing themselves

into our nausea.

 

Yet we never quite die on the spot.

We put off being what we’re called,

we take the hint.

 

Time is never wasted.

It is always spent.

 

 

2. Teleology

 

Sheer fabric trailing through 4 a.m.

I thought it was opaque and earlier.

 

 

3. Mathematics

 

I know you know I know.

And the mirror multiplies inside.

 

The world is no bigger, but next time

do the math,

 

because I wanted to know none

of what I now know twice.

 

 

4. The Principle of the Borg

 

Saying “There’s no one like me”

accomplishes the exact opposite

of what you mean.

 

It is true only insofar as it is true

for everyone equally.

 

So it means you are not special

in any way. Which should be enough for you.

 

 

5. Documentary

 

This clothing, a maladaptive wrapping,

cuts me up. I am a vignette,

 

floated knowingly

since I pulled myself through myself,

 

like a unitard. Too many eyeholes

 

have been cut and pieced together

to make flesh less various with others.

 

 

6. Medicine

 

The cure for embarrassment

is substitution.

 

Strap, don’t pluck.

Baldness makes headlines.

 

Use grass. Use less.

Shorts under your skirt for recess.

 

Redo the surfaces of your wrong turns to make

taking them smoother in the future.

 

 

7. Cosmology

 

Things are less embarrassing

at the cellular level. Remember?

 

We were a whole part of the universe

before Mother busted the party.

 

Before we were ourselves.

Now, like dirty soap, we

 

attract what we repel.

 

 

8. Apology

 

Even the clumsiest fate is perfectly shaped,

so the view took over looking

 

but the sweetest thing I’ve ever known

is obscene with a beautiful

 

sugar rotted down to its truth.

 

Loving you a serious accidental shame

and day flatulates into night,

 

trips and falls in front of millions

into morning.

 

In thrall to this pocus:

the end of fear starts

 

with such an annihilating blush,

with such a stutter.
~~~
I shall not go with painWhether you hold me, whether you forgetMy little loss and my immortal gain.O flower unseen, O fountain sealed apart!Give me one look, one look remembering yet,Sweet heart.I shall not go with grief,Whether you call me, whether you denyThe crowning vintage and the golden sheaf.O, April hopes that blossom but to close!Give me one look, one look and so good-bye,Red rose.I shall not go with sighs,But as full-crowned the warrior leaves the fight,Dawn on his shield and death upon his eyes.O, life so bitter-sweet and heaven so far!Give me one look, one look and so good night,My star.
~~~
my god all the days we have lived thru
saying
 
not this
one, not this,
not now,
not yet, this week
doesn’t count, was lost, this month
was shit, what a year, it sucked,
it flew, that decade was for
what? i raised my kids, they
grew i lost two pasts–i am
not made of them and they
are through.
 
we forget what
we remember:
 
each of the five
the fevered few
 
days we used to
fall in love.
~~~
After Rabelais' Gargantua and Pantagruel



His Exterior
toes like blue glass marbles
nails like wax shavings
feet like those of an elephant   
heels like narrow escapes
soles like yellow sponges expanding in water   
legs like longitude and latitude   
knees like neon headlights
thighs like open desert in a movie   
hips like a leaping horse
a belly button like a luminescent watch   
pubic hair like frontier instances   
a penis like overnight mail
balls large as a boar-hound’s
seminal vesicles like tulip bulbs in a paper bag   
testicle muscles like rising chords   
an asshole like an undiscovered planet   
buttocks like a fleet antelope’s   
a sacrum like plein air painting   
a back like a chalked sidewalk   
a spinal column like a suspension bridge   
ribs like a bookcase
a sternum like gum
shoulder blades like kitchen tables   
a chest like a stuffed animal
pectorals like floating bars of soap   
shoulders like observed facts
arms like lassos
fingers like sparklers
wrist bones like a shipyard
elbows like antidotes
hands like passports
an Adam’s apple like a great circle course
a beard like Whitman’s
a chin like a lichen-splotched rock   
ears like a full bathtub
a nose like a birdcage
nostrils like subway tunnels   
eyebrows like a captive audience   
a birthmark like a stop sign   
eyelids like a partial eclipse   
eyes like effervescence
optical nerves like an orchid
a forehead like a window display   
temples like singing crickets   
cheeks like party invitations   
jaws like handcuffs
teeth like sweet tea
a tongue like watercolors
a mouth like a silk lampshade   
a face like a moving picture   
a head like a jar of pennies   
a skull like a geode
skin with a black line running down it   
epidermis like a wool sweater   
whiskers like a street sweeper   
and hair like a cloudy day.His Interior
cerebellum like a coffee grinder
cerebral lobes like a house on fire
cranial membranes like a construction-paper diorama   
optical nerves like a developing Polaroid
cerebral fornix like colonial maps
pineal gland like a giant pinecone
circulatory system like cello strings
eardrums like a still life with oranges
forehead like television   
backbone like a fiddlehead fern
nerve channels like transatlantic cables
uvula like a propeller   
palate like a telegram
saliva like a rotating sprinkler
tonsils like action figures
stomach like professional wrestling
trachea like pirate radio
throat like a bold headline
lungs like plastic bags caught in a tree
heart like a supernova
pulmonary membranes like dirigibles
arteries like rush hour   
diaphragm like the sound barrier
liver like a public trial
veins like Japanese characters
spleen like a rogue   
bowels like surrealism   
guts like an inheritance
small intestine like fake pearls
large intestine like stolen currency
colon like reliable data   
rectum like a fade-out   
kidneys like a barrier reef
loins like a mowed lawn   
renal veins like gossip   
sperm glands like lava beds   
prostate like a fissure vent   
bladder like a fish bowl   
abdomen like a leather suitcase   
muscles like an assembly line   
tendons like pickpockets   
ligaments like safety pins   
bones like bones
marrow like realism
cartilage like strips of kelp   
lymph glands like sentimentality   
urine like sugar water   
blood like melted crayons   
and sperm like flies in amber.How He Acts
If he laughs, it’s spontaneous combustion   
If he mutters, it’s a retreating glacier
If he pouts, he sharpens his horn on stones
If he jumps up and down, its hard to look away
If he scratches himself, it’s with an aspen branch
If he gets angry, he fights with tooth, horn, and heel   
If he spits, he fights his own kind   
If he blows his nose, it starts a riot   
If he sweats, it’s monsoons
If he coughs, it unlocks doors in the next room
If he argues, it’s over lost rituals
If he sighs, it ruffles goldfinch feathers   
If he whistles, it’s overheard miles away   
If he snores, it’s over nostalgic reveries
If he scowls, spears launch from his eyes   
If he snorts, it’s over gilt lion-head spouts   
If he shits, it’s historical documents   
If he belches, it’s a diary
If he vomits, there’s finger-pointing all around
If he walks, it’s Chaplin
If he writes, it’s manifestos
If he goes shopping, it’s for lentils and peas   
If he dances, it’s the Rites of Spring   
If he swears, he’s a ryght cruell beast
If he drives, it’s among the Mountains of the Moon   
If he bathes, it’s in deceptive surfaces   
If he dresses, it’s a white linen suit   
If he wonders, it’s if his own reflection   
If he’s jealous, it’s of birthday parties   
If he lies, it’s about mathematical errors   
If he spends money, it’s on magic lanterns   
If he goes to the movies, it’s Vertigo
If he listens to music, it’s the sound of running water
If he falls, it’s down a slope of turf into the bushes   
If he recites, it’s from the Beast Epic of Alexandria   
If he is seduced, it’s a river of electricity
If he is curious, he attempts to draw
If he calls, it’s about weather patterns
If he sings, it’s ‘Tyger, Tyger’
and if he escapes, he’s swift of foot.
~~~
1
 
There is a house in me. It is empty. I empty it.
 
Negative space: the only native emptiness there is.
There is
 
 
2
 
An alarm goes off. It goes on and on. When the alarm
drifts to different parts of the room,
 
I realize, that alarm is the sun.
 
 
3
 
And there is no one who does not need,
 
never an empty seat. And the blind one,
 
he does not find a place. There is a god in him
helping him to need himself.
 
 
4
 
A mother sticks a spoon into my chest,
which is an empty bowl, actually,
 
so the spoon lands quickly
and loudly. Heartbreak in the heart! she says.
 
When you love someone
more than you’ve ever known you could, it is
a good thing, except for the terrifying
 
realization that one day there comes
a parting.
 
~~~
I Love me Sweet, with all thou art,    Feeling, thinking, seeing; Love me in the lightest part,    Love me in full being. II Love me with thine open youth    In its frank surrender; With the vowing of thy mouth,    With its silence tender. III Love me with thine azure eyes,    Made for earnest granting; Taking colour from the skies,    Can Heaven’s truth be wanting? IV Love me with their lids, that fall    Snow-like at first meeting; Love me with thine heart, that all    Neighbours then see beating. V Love me with thine hand stretched out    Freely—open-minded: Love me with thy loitering foot,—    Hearing one behind it. VI Love me with thy voice, that turns    Sudden faint above me; Love me with thy blush that burns    When I murmur Love me! VII Love me with thy thinking soul,    Break it to love-sighing; Love me with thy thoughts that roll    On through living—dying. VIII Love me when in thy gorgeous airs,    When the world has crowned thee; Love me, kneeling at thy prayers,    With the angels round thee. IX Love me pure, as musers do,    Up the woodlands shady: Love me gaily, fast and true    As a winsome lady. X Through all hopes that keep us brave,    Farther off or nigher, Love me for the house and grave,    And for something higher. XI Thus, if thou wilt prove me, Dear,    Woman’s love no fable. I will love thee—half a year—    As a man is able. 
~~~
I feel the spring far off, far off,    The faint, far scent of bud and leaf— Oh, how can spring take heart to come    To a world in grief,    Deep grief?   The sun turns north, the days grow long,    Later the evening star grows bright— How can the daylight linger on    For men to fight,    Still fight?   The grass is waking in the ground,    Soon it will rise and blow in waves— How can it have the heart to sway    Over the graves,    New graves?   Under the boughs where lovers walked    The apple-blooms will shed their breath— But what of all the lovers now    Parted by Death,    Grey Death?
~~~
First sew yourself into a pom pom mushroom
Strut across the thirstland past faerie lights
Shout complaints inside volcanic mancaves
Scout for the last unlocated spring of ylem
Then plait a cottage out of kestrel fluff
Stir potato eyes into a vat of dislocated feelings
Write a luculent novel five winters long
Till dismay ferments enough nuclear energy to power
Your moon buggy beyond the nacaret fields
Stopping only to gather the pollen of the Umbiferous True
Then plunge over cliffs sporting moth wings
Dropping to the bottommost of the besprinkled sea
And make your way up through the rain shadow
On two cat feet in hostile territory
All the while you compose a callithumpian song
To nail a ritual within the astrobleme
So bend dragons and constellate your enemies
Fox on your shoulder spend a month sun-grazing
A hundred hawks exploding before your stride
Which will bring you luck on this godawful day
You must make a new life by yourself like all
Lurching tellurians stuck in eviternity
~~~
Nay, Doll, quoth Roger, now you're caught,      I'll never let you goTill you consent, —To what? says Doll,     Zounds, Doll, why, do'stn't know? She faintly screamed, and vowed she would     If hurt, cry out aloud; Ne'er fear, says he, then seized the fair,     She sighed—and sighed—and vowed,—A'nt I a Man, quoth Roger, ha!     Me you need never doubt,Now did I hurt you, Doll? quoth he,     Or, pray? says Doll, did I cry out?
~~~
After all, there’s no need
to say anything
at first. An orange, peeled
and quartered, flares
like a tulip on a wedgewood plate
Anything can happen.
Outside the sun
has rolled up her rugs
and night strewn salt
across the sky. My heart
is humming a tune
I haven’t heard in years!
Quiet’s cool flesh—
let’s sniff and eat it.
There are ways
to make of the moment
a topiary
so the pleasure’s in
walking through.
~~~
I
Oh chimes set high on the sunny tower   
    Ring on, ring on unendingly,
Make all the hours a single hour,   
For when the dusk begins to flower,   
    The man I love will come to me! ...
But no, go slowly as you will,
    I should not bid you hasten so,   
For while I wait for love to come,   
Some other girl is standing dumb,
    Fearing her love will go.
       II
Oh white steam over the roofs, blow high!   
    Oh chimes in the tower ring clear and free!   
Oh sun awake in the covered sky,
    For the man I love, loves me! ...
Oh drifting steam disperse and die,
    Oh tower stand shrouded toward the south,—
Fate heard afar my happy cry,
    And laid her finger on my mouth.
       III
The dusk was blue with blowing mist,   
    The lights were spangles in a veil,   
And from the clamor far below
    Floated faint music like a wail.
It voiced what I shall never speak,
    My heart was breaking all night long,
But when the dawn was hard and gray,   
    My tears distilled into a song.
       IV
I said, “I have shut my heart   
    As one shuts an open door,
That Love may starve therein   
    And trouble me no more.”
But over the roofs there came
    The wet new wind of May,
And a tune blew up from the curb
    Where the street-pianos play.
My room was white with the sun   
    And Love cried out to me,
“I am strong, I will break your heart   
    Unless you set me free.”
~~~
The door to the past is a strange door. It swings open and things pass through it, but they pass in one direction only. No man can return across that threshold, though he can look down still and see the green light waver in the weeds.
          Loren Eiseley
A door opens in the wilderness.
People cross through it—bloused women families
 
Acquaintances friends all the ones I have loved
Sleep-walkers night-walkers each dazed and shorn—
 
Street aurous with ice, a snowfall scratched into
Moons—and everything I’d known—
 
Inside the bleak floating light of my lungs
In the capillaries of my eyes a blood
 
Glancing through the hatches—
If I said I would always be grateful
 
If I lied or touched with spite
If night is just a foamline of shadows
 
Though we were both lost—the door
Opening—the fear of being shown
 
Whole to the one who must love you still—
And stopped as if on a walk to say
 Look at that and what matters what really counts 
And I’ll tell you everything if you promise I promise
 
I stood at door and behind me heard
Snow-plows scrape against roads
 
At the center of night—unknown to yourself 
And the word I said out-loud to no one
 
That meant it was all to no purpose 
The word for the desire inside destruction 
 
For everything that can never be brought back—
Loose snow blown hard to each bank
 
And the common reel of those who
To avoid one extreme rush toward its opposite—
 
Snow blasted to piles—and never opened up to
Anything that could reach me until you reached me—
 
Which hours belonged to us
When was I unknowingly alone
 
Why did you always return to walk here a path
Behind my closed eyes shedding salt
 
Dry snowfall and sticks—still were you here
With me I might say The moon rose in the casement window 
 The red-haired boy across the street has learned to ride his bike
There are still picnics there are fountains
 
And the world I am leaving behind saysOne learns to see one learns to be kind—
 
I closed my eyes I closed my hands
I shut down the fields in my arms
 
The cattle on the plains veins ditches
Blue ravines a gray bird
 
Sailing through a poplar brake kids
Throwing snow I closed the last swinging juncos
 
Sheep wool caught on barbed wire I closed
Fumes and clear patches of sky I seized
 
The river the town I shut down
The hard muscles of sleep farmlands
 
Warming under midnight salt-lights scruff-pines
On the ridge animals scattering across slopes I closed
 
The smooth bone of evening a storm
On the hills white and noiseless spindled
 
Prairies where I was born I shut I seized
The clouds I closed in anger—fervor—ardor
 
~~~
When you said no,              I went for your dresser, opened the top drawer,              broke the paper seals on the two sterile cups,              and wiped my dirty thumbs inside.              Because our stubborn love won’t die, I have to kill it,             will it dead. Or so I thought until I passed              a cycle on my own. You’ve no idea              what’s grown inside me             since I bled.
~~~
Too high, too high to pluck
My heart shall swing.
A fruit no bee shall suck,
No wasp shall sting.
If on some night of cold
It falls to ground
In apple-leaves of gold
I’ll wrap it round.
And I shall seal it up
With spice and salt,
In a carven silver cup,
In a deep vault.
Before my eyes are blind
And my lips mute,
I must eat core and rind
Of that same fruit.
Before my heart is dust
At the end of all,
Eat it I must, I must
Were it bitter gall.
But I shall keep it sweet
By some strange art;
Wild honey I shall eat
When I eat my heart.
O honey cool and chaste
As clover’s breath!
Sweet Heaven I shall taste
Before my death.
~~~
Then there was the time I looked directly into the face of the life I thought I was missing, of love. I used to think to be not alone meant never having to walk through the high wheat or struggle in the water. Not having to decide notto fling from some height.Once, the two of us rode one bicycle.I wore a straw hat and perched on the handlebars and beside us the sea oats swayed like skirts and I heard a trilling in the crabgrass. The sidewalks were bleached as Grecian stoneas we rode past the fish shop smelling of morning—salt, bread, limes, men.Riding in front, it was such that I could not be heard always, at least not the first timefor you pedaled into the wind and my hair was a ribbon in your eyes.I said I thought bougainvillea was a stoic plant and then had to say twice, no, stoic! and then no, the bougainvillea! and then you said easily it was nothing like that at all. But our future was clear enough when I asked if you saw the clean aprons of those men (how much longer you think until they clean the fish? did you see how white those aprons were? did you see?)
~~~
Yes of forsythia against the limitless ivy, a nude posed in a garden
against the silver maple pinwheeling its children into a gown around her
chime of the cliff-hanging falcon’s screeching talons against a rabbit,
wheezing soldier in a field, gunpowder tainting the cake in his pocket
jet fuel over the Pacific, waking to a hula in a zephyr,
the bride deplaning onto an island chain, bowing to leis of plumeria
the mallow of nurses’ shoes, their news, the black sedan
of a telephone spreading it like a virus and, after, the scent of a cedar closet
white gloves of a mare, in heat, pawing clover, the sail of a Spitfire
cresting a hill in San Francisco, angelic against sunset
rosin on the cello’s catgut, a honeycombed queen calling home
her lovers, a Basquiat above the head of an ascetic, chaos over order
magenta in the thorns, shy to the shears, making the blue jays bluer,
a someone on the bed’s chenille edge, composing an oratorio of medicines
the bartender in his ice pick scars, twisting zest over his creation, wheel
and butane of his Zippo kissing as the citrus, at last, expresses
~~~
Louisiana skies paddle north nodding hello to some exiles displaced by floodwaters so we all putter in the bisque in fretted dresses, alleviated by a fan. But we have nothing on "Le Matin," in whose rococo frame a curtain sweeps to bare a boudoir, a Bichon Frisé worrying something between paws, begging the dulcet glance of the mistress whose push-up, cupless corset and up-drawn stocking border what they fall short of, per the stern frame rippling like a cloud! Even the candle angles to get a look in the mirror engloving the scene. Why it is her slipper the bitch clutches!   The gentleman's reverie is elsewhere . . . Loitering Louisiana stops to admire this engraving by "N. Lavreinee." What a chevalier! It makes the smeariest sunset think it's in a Restoration Comedy, in such humidity chefs defer meringues. "Ksar Rouge," "Taos Adobe," "Gulf Shrimp"—a thousand names of softboiled lipsticks fritter English as if it were French, meaning meeting no resistance from the flesh.
~~~
(“Died of Wounds”)



Because you died, I shall not rest again,      But wander ever through the lone world wide,  Seeking the shadow of a dream grown vain              Because you died.    I shall spend brief and idle hours beside      The many lesser loves that still remain,  But find in none my triumph and my pride;    And Disillusion's slow corroding stain      Will creep upon each quest but newly tried,  For every striving now shall nothing gain              Because you died.
~~~
I have studied the tight curls on the back of your neck   
moving away from me
beyond anger or failure
your face in the evening schools of longing
through mornings of wish and ripen
we were always saying goodbye
in the blood in the bone over coffee
before dashing for elevators going
in opposite directions
without goodbyes.
Do not remember me as a bridge nor a roof   
as the maker of legends
nor as a trap
door to that world
where black and white clericals
hang on the edge of beauty in five oclock elevators   
twitching their shoulders to avoid other flesh   
and now
there is someone to speak for them   
moving away from me into tomorrows   
morning of wish and ripen
your goodbye is a promise of lightning   
in the last angels hand
unwelcome and warning
the sands have run out against us   
we were rewarded by journeys
away from each other
into desire
into mornings alone
where excuse and endurance mingle   
conceiving decision.
Do not remember me
as disaster
nor as the keeper of secrets
I am a fellow rider in the cattle cars
watching
you move slowly out of my bed   
saying we cannot waste time
only ourselves.
~~~
Strephon, your breach of faith and trust      Affords me no surprise; A man who grateful was, or just,      Might make my wonder rise. That heart to you so fondly tied,      With pleasure wore its chain, But from your cold neglectful pride,      Found liberty again. For this no wrath inflames my mind,      My thanks are due to thee; Such thanks as gen'rous victors find,     Who set their captives free.
~~~
Some things lock in competition, like an earthquake and a kiss. While a decision is waiting to be made, neither side of the argument progresses. The earthquake, though eager to prove its claim, shows valiant restraint; the kiss? It knows the power of bitten tongues.
 
Such stand-offs as these precede most gains (stance of knowing too much and fearing too late). The tongues, shaking along with the house, say nothing shattering at all.
 
With progress, not only earthquakes but kisses will be predicted. The last fine line between feeling and fact will choose a good point, and end. Flattery will continue to make us immortal in the difficult years between the first word and the lost.
 

* In which Mary, herself a palette of grays, inhabitant of a universe void of color, gains access to the complete scientific story of what makes red red—and reads it.
~~~
When my aunt died,
my uncle raised his hands
like a prophet in the Bible.
“I've lost my girl,” he said,
“I've lost my girl,” over and over,
shaking his head.
I didn't know what to say,
where to look,
my quiet uncle raising his voice
to silence.
My aunt was eighty-seven.
“Listen,” my uncle said, sighing
like a tree alone at night,
“women know.
Every midnight on New Year's Eve,
when others sang
and laughed and hugged,
your aunt looked at me,
tears in her eyes.
Sixty years.
She knew.
One day, we'd kiss good-bye.”
~~~
Lynda Hull



Maybe you sold it to buy junk. Though I like to think not.And I don't want to think you used the money for foodor rent or anything obligatory, practical.

A pair of boots, perhaps. Thigh high burgandy boots
with gold laces. Something crucial as lilies.
Mostly, I want to believe you held onto the book,
that your fingers brailed those pages' inky veins
even in your final weeks. I want to believe
words can be that important in the end.
Who can help the heart, which is grand and full
of gestures? I had been on my way out.
He was rearranging his bookshelves
when, in an approximation of tenderness, 
he handed me, like the last of the sweet potatoes
at Thanksgiving, like a thing he wanted
but was willing to share, the rediscovered book—
he'd bought it years ago in a used bookstore
in Chicago. Levine's poems, with your signature inside.
That whole year I spent loving him, something splendid
as lemons, sour and bright and leading my tongue
toward new language, was on the shelf. These
weren't your own poems, autographed, a stranger's
souvenir—we'd spent vain months leafing through
New York stacks for your out-of-print collections—but you'd cared
about this book, or cared enough to claim it, your name
looped across the title page as if to say, Please.This is mine, This book is mine. Though you sold it.
Or someone else did when you died.
We make habits out of words. I grew accustomed
to his, the way they spooned me into sleep
so many times. Now I am sleepless and alone
another night. What would you give for one more night
alone? No booze. No drugs. Just that hunger
and those words. He gave me The Names of the Lost.
Need comes down hard on a body. What else
was sold? What else—do you know?—did we lose
 
~~~
The world had fled, with all its silly caresand questionable aches, and in one swoonwe rose above its stupefying airslike flying lovesick pigs up to the moon.     In that blue light where two lives equaled all,     our souls looked down upon a spinning ball.The world returned, and this was a surpriseI raged against like someone on a rack,telling the sun, tears clouding my stunned eyes,give us our splendid isolation back.     I craved third rails, a shot of something strong     when I found out it doesn’t last for long.The world came back and stayed, pain never ended,but when the aches and cares begged for a hand,grew softer in the light we’d made and tended,I finally began to understand    love’s widening third stage, and of the three    this was the most outstanding ecstasy.
~~~
his eyelids like a moth’s fringed wings.
Arms flail against the Ninja Turtle sheet
and suddenly-long legs
race time.
 
Awake, he’s a water-leak detector, a recycling ranger
who bans Styrofoam and asks for beeswax
crayons, a renewable resource.
He wants to adopt the Missouri river,
write the president
to make factories stop polluting.
 
They’re old friends, he and George Bush.
He writes and scolds
the president, every month or so,
about the bombing the children of Iraq
(he made his own sign to carry in protest),
about the plight of the California condor and northern gray wolf,
about more shelters and aid for the homeless.
The lion-shaped bulletin board in his room
is covered with pictures and letters from George,
who must be nice,
even if he is a slow learner.
 
Joseph is a mystery fan, owns 54 Nancy Drews.
Nancy’s his friend, along with Jo, Meg, and Amy
and poor Beth, of course, whom he still mourns.
He also reads of knights and wizards, superheroes,
and how to win at Nintendo.
 
The cats and houseplants are his to feed and water
and the sunflower blooming in the driveway’s border
of weeds. He drew our backyard to scale,
using map symbols, sent off to have it declared
an official wildlife refuge, left a good-night
note on my pillow, written in Egyptian hieroglyphs.
 
In my life, I have done one good thing.
~~~
Reader unmov’d and Reader unshaken, Reader unseduc’d   
and unterrified, through the long-loud and the sweet-still   
I creep toward you. Toward you, I thistle and I climb.
I crawl, Reader, servile and cervine, through this blank   
season, counting—I sleep and I sleep. I sleep,
Reader, toward you, loud as a cloud and deaf, Reader, deaf
as a leaf. Reader: Why don’t you turn
pale?
~~~
To Men



You put on an ornate ballgown
You say “someone has to do it”
You take me to where you work,
The inside of a pyramid with chasms,
Watching the complex train-track changes
Products and objects make love to my father
Two babies are born—Bruno and Daisy
You take your shirt off looking boylike & lovely
You get on the plane, both clown & wizard
And then get off in a comedy of manners
Our dates become a comedy of dinners
Your name rhymes with clothes
Your plane folds & flies away
Without us, I’ll make the next one
We are enclosed in spaceless epics by breathless bricks
& still we’ll meet like runes or the leashes for hawks
Let’s go! Can we stay? Go to sleep.
A tree wouldn’t talk or weep if I-forget-what
And you in the train’s opulent rooms
Switch your cock to a baby and then say
“Must there (not) be a law against this?”
You add, “I have been thinking of you in my head”
You wear green glitter on your shirt instead of
A tie, that’s how I recognize you as you
You are the prep cook the sous-chef you make
Duplicating potato salad like the loaves & fishes
You create gorgeous paper-like sculptures of foods
We go down in the car through threatening snows
To arrive in a second to eat in a renovated place
You and I tell “what” we are at the end of a movie
Our podium of soft loud feet flies by accident
I take the train to your house to hear Shakespeare & Verdi
Everyone applauds when you walk in. The director
Holds up each actor & describes his physical being
I talk to your father but only by telephone
You have the royal blue 8 � x 11 notebook with the lock on it
I want one but you say you cant get them anymore
I walk twice through that city I’ve been in before
All through its rooms, its streets and its Commons
~~~
While the Doormat asks neurotic questions about his ex,
the Dream Girl looks at her watch if her man brings up the ex,
and if the man ever says, “Everyone was in love with my ex,”
a Dream Girl won’t ask for a photo, but if a photo of the ex
is provided, the Dream Girl won’t demean the appearance of the ex
because her man will likely rush to his ex’s
defense. The lesson is that when a man considers his ex
a prize looks have little to do with it, for when a woman acts
like a prize a man can forget he’s with a battle axe.
What should you say when he asks questions about your ex?
Remember you’re a prize, so you needn’t report that your ex
stole appliances or defaulted on child support or that your ex
has a Mafioso brother doing time for racketeering or that your ex
is “still stalking you” — because your man will not find these ex
stories charming, if he’s classy, so what you say about your ex
is simply, “We wanted different things,” or, alternatively, “My ex
and I went separate ways.” It’s none of his business: your ex
and all the vicissitudes of your past, like the jewelry your ex
gave you which you pawned, or your violent fantasies about your ex
because inquiring minds don’t need to know. Did you know that exes
are a common conversation topic among men: “You remember my ex,
the one who snapped ... ?” they might say, referring to the “terrible” ex
who was “possessed by demons,” thus causing the inevitable ex-
tramarital affair? Of course he never had anything to do with his ex’s
transformation, he was a perfect angel, but lo and behold, the ex-
orcist was suddenly required! Women believe these narratives and ex-
coriate themselves if they’re Doormats, but love is beset by variables,
and Dream Girls must take control in this world of unknowns.
~~~
Korean monster movie on the SyFy channel,lurid Dora the Explorer blanket draped tentlikeover Baby’s portacrib to shield us from unearnedinnocence. The monster slings its carapace in reverse swan dive up the embankment, triple-jointed bug legs clattering, bathroom door ajar, exhaust roaring, both of us naked, monster chomps fast food stands, all that quilted aluminum, eats through streamsof running people, the promiscuously cheerful guilty Americanscientist dies horribly. Grease-dusted ceiling fan paddles erratically, two spars missing. Sheets whirled to the polluted rug. I reach under the bed, fish out somebody else’s crunched beer can, my forearm comes out dirty. Monster brachiates from bridge girders like a gibbonlooping round and around uneven bars, those are your fingersin my tangles or my fingers, my head hangshalf off the king-size, monster takes tiny child actorto its bone stash. Pillow’s wet. The warped ceiling mirror makes us look like fat porno dwarfsin centripetal silver nitrate ripples. My glasses on the side table tipped onto scratchproof lenses, earpieces sticking up like arms out of disaster rubble. Your feet hooked over my feet. What miasmalays gold dander down on forms of temporarysurvivors wandering the promenade? You pull Doraback over us—Baby’s dead to the world—intrude your propagandistic intimacy jokes, unforgiving. “What, in a motel room?” I say.Purple clouds roll back to reveal Armageddona dream in bad digital unreality. Explosions repeat patterns like fake flames dance on fake fireplace logs. Sad Armageddonof marriage: how pretty much nice we meant to be, and couldn’t make a difference.
~~~
carefully folded, swooned, postpartum
 
posthaste—
 
 
my letter to you, I gave— 
 
curious, you said uncanny you 
 
said the color of my eyes in this light
 
is a different shade of green said
 
you don't eat meat but you wear
 
leather outside the birds
 
& inside the sun on the chair
 
& my thighs spread &
 
stick to the plastic &
 
you said you loved
 
it & the ampersand & my swoon
 
silently inside my skirt & the ochre
 
on the building changes to umber
 
in the light & the tree outside is
 
bare & I am, my foot inside my slipper
 
my toes curled behind & ow & yes
 
& some days are sunny days & some
 
days are
~~~
Pale, with the blue of high zeniths, shimmered over with silver, brocaded
In smooth, running patterns, a soft stuff, with dark knotted fringes, it lies there,
Warm from a woman’s soft shoulders, and my fingers close on it, caressing.
Where is she, the woman who wore it? The scent of her lingers and drugs me.
A languor, fire-shotted, runs through me, and I crush the scarf down on my face,
And gulp in the warmth and the blueness, and my eyes swim in cool-tinted heavens.
Around me are columns of marble, and a diapered, sun-flickered pavement.
Rose-leaves blow and patter against it. Below the stone steps a lute tinkles.
A jar of green jade throws its shadow half over the floor. A big-bellied
Frog hops through the sunlight, and plops in the gold-bubbled water of a basin,
Sunk in the black and white marble. The west wind has lifted a scarf
On the seat close beside me; the blue of it is a violent outrage of colour.
She draws it more closely about her, and it ripples beneath her slight stirring.
Her kisses are sharp buds of fire; and I burn back against her, a jewel
Hard and white, a stalked, flaming flower; till I break to a handful of cinders,
And open my eyes to the scarf, shining blue in the afternoon sunshine.
How loud clocks can tick when a room is empty, and one is alone!
~~~
At supper he whispers something in your ear,

the Judas boy, who wants you.

 

We go to the garden where it’s cool

and wait.

 

From my place against the tree

I see you through the window,

 

watch as you walk from door to desk,

reach into your pocket,

 

pull out your wallet, empty it and leave it by the lamp,

pick up a pen, lean over to write, then don’t,

 

take something heavy from the drawer, put it back

then sweep the money into a paper bag.

 

You walk from desk to door and out, your hand

reaching back to put out the light.

 

On the security film you leave the building

alone, holding the heavy bag.

 

Off camera you walk towards the Charles, leave

your saddle shoes under the pedestrian bridge.

 

We wait in the garden.

And wait.

 

We don’t know yet whom you meet or why.
We don’t know yet that the river has claimed you.
~~~
What is this tint that in the shrill cress
Will never cease to trouble us and in the fields
Gives prick and praise for Beauty?
And said birds that feed on berries
Are pervious—and shook the snow from his thighs.
I thought of nothing carefully, but of snow, and the birds.
Then kissed the cup and sipped a little
Though almost choked drank slowly
Tickled with strange measure
She faked a pretty anger
I entertained the night with fantastic, empty pleasure
We went as far as the ivie-bush
And ivie-crowns upon our heads
And carried her kiss untouched and entire
Then all was fresh, inclined
To wriggle and nussle and lascivious
Ardent leaps. In the thickest of the wood
Bid him kiss close and often
And directed him to her fancie
The ground had a sweeter scent, the boughs a blush
One fruit, rare and rich, would outdo many together
She was wild to climb the tree
Nor would she be forbidden
She seized the apple and put it in her bosom.
~~~
Stricken, seen, satellite at the edge of a party,
being fifteen, with the black bulbs someone’s planted
in the mother’s lamps to give glow-in-the-dark
ambiance to hideous kisses, and the ruffles
are all wrong on the saved-for shirt, and the curtains,
suave in the murk, seem to laugh. The liquidy
fin of feeling is destination-less, twisting
like paper wrapped ’round a pinkie
in blind date anticipation. Toy for
the psyche, phrase to swim through the mind
like an offense, at 3 AM.
Half-helix, as if waiting for, Oh God, don’t
say it,
~~~
A Scholar first my Love implor’d,And then an empty, titled Lord;The Pedant talk’d in lofty Strains;Alas! his Lordship wanted Brains:I list’ned not, to one or t’other,But straight referr’d them to my Mother.A Poet next my Love assail’d,A Lawyer hop’d to have prevail’d;The Bard too much approv’d himself,The Lawyer thirsted after Pelf:I list’ned not, to one or t’other,But still referr’d them to my Mother.An Officer my Heart wou’d storm,A Miser, sought me too, in Form;But Mars was over-free and bold,The miser’s Heart was in his Gold:I list’ned not, to one or t’other,Referring still unto my Mother.And after them, some twenty more,Successless were, as those before;When Damon, lovely Damon came!Our Hearts strait felt a mutual Flame;I vow’d I’d have him, and no other,Without referring, to my Mother.
~~~
My letters! all dead paper, ... mute and white ! —
And yet they seem alive and quivering
Against my tremulous hands which loose the string
And let them drop down on my knee to-night.
This said, ... he wished to have me in his sight
Once, as a friend: this fixed a day in spring
To come and touch my hand ... a simple thing,
Yet I wept for it! — this, ... the paper's light ...
Said, Dear, I love thee; and I sank and quailed
As if God's future thundered on my past.
This said, I am thine — and so its ink has paled
With lying at my heart that beat too fast.
And this ... O Love, thy words have ill availed,
If, what this said, I dared repeat at last!
~~~
I poured a whiskey and soda
watching the tree outside dissolve:
light going backward   pushed to corners
to the white sliver of wood
around the door.Where was that river seething with light?
I recall the banks menaced by wasps
swollen on summer sap, a cement hollow
stuck with their strange cradles
a woozy stench of damp clay
the blunt poison of water snakes.
~~~
Like silent naked monks huddledaround an old tree stump, havingspun themselves in the nightout of thought and nothingness—And God so pleased with their silenceHe grants them teeth and tongues.Like us.How long have you been gone?A child’s hot tears on my bare arms.
~~~
for John



At a party I spy a handsome psychiatrist,
And wish, as we all do, to get her advice for free.
Doctor, I’ll say, I’m supposed to be a poet.
All life’s awfulness has been grist to me.
We learn that happiness is a Chinese meal,
While sorrow is a nourishment forever.
My new environment is California Dreamer.
I’m fearful I’m forgetting how to brood.
And, Doctor, another thing has got me worried:
I’m not drinking as much as I should . . .
 
At home, I want to write a happy poem
On love, or a love poem of happiness.
But they won’t do, the tensions of every day,
The rub, the minor abrasions of any two
Who share one space. Ah, there’s no substitute for tragedy!
But in this chapter, tragedy belongs
To that other life, the old life before us.
Here is my aphorism of the day:
Happy people are monogamous.
Even in California. So how does the poem play
 
Without the paraphernalia of betrayal and loss?
I don’t have a jealous eye or fear
And neither do you. In truth, I’m fond
Of your ex-mate, whom I name “my wife-in-law.”
My former husband, that old disaster, is now just funny,
So laugh we do, in what Cyril Connolly
Has called the endless, nocturnal conversation
Of marriage. Which may be the best part.
Darling, must I love you in light verse
Without the tribute of profoundest art?
 
Of course it won’t last. You will break my heart
Or I yours, by dying. I could weep over that.
But now it seems forced, here in these heaven hills,
The mourning doves mourning, the squirrels mating,
My old cat warm in my lap, here on our terrace
As from below comes a musical cursing
As you mend my favorite plate. Later of course
I could pick a fight; there is always material in that.
But we don’t come from fighting people, those
Who scream out red-hot iambs in their hate.
 
No, love, the heavy poem will have to come
From temps perdu, fertile with pain, or perhaps
Detonated by terrors far beyond this place
Where the world rends itself, and its tainted waters
Rise in the east to erode our safety here.
Much as I want to gather a lifetime thrift
And craft, my cunning skills tied in a knot for you,
There is only this useless happiness as gift.﻿
~~~
but lake winds pick him up
& blow him into the clouds. I
married a dreamer. I wait. He
stops to listen to the early
lilac orchestra. He starts to
change into blowy horizontal lake
rain, then migrating red admirals.
 
I thinksay remember. I remember us.
We chose the imaginal
north/south somewhere
between Bartlett Avenue and Jupiter,
between Lake Michigan and
the Aegean. Remember we drink
Serbian Cosmos together, we eat
squash blossoms and red snapper soup.
We visit the Calatrava before bed. We
nurture a magnetic field of words. I am
 
remembering you back. Remembering
plays time. Thinking is all remembering.
I remember our young
bodies. I'm not finished
with us. Remember that.
If someone asks, "why is that lady
out walking in that lake storm?" Tell them
"months ago her husband went to the
store in a blizzard & never came back."
Tell them: "She can't stop looking for him.”
~~~
The world is full of loss; bring, wind, my love,
         my home is where we make our meeting-place,
         and love whatever I shall touch and read
         within that face.
Lift, wind, my exile from my eyes;
         peace to look, life to listen and confess,
         freedom to find to find to find
         that nakedness.
~~~
I am unhappy about your description of my life as dull.
It is dull but I dislike you using the word dull.
If I could I would unhook the receiver from the wall and
place it on your dirty mouth. I don’t feel able to elucidate.
If you hadn’t known the German for lose/lose, if you
hadn’t the face of Dürer as Christ in Self-Portrait of
Dürer as Christ
~~~
It’s too cold to smoke outside, but if you come over,
I’ll keep my hands to myself, or won’t I.
I would like to tell you about the wall eaten up
 
by the climbing plant—it was so beautiful.
Various things have been happening to me,
all of them sexual. The man on the bus
 
took off his pants so I could see him better.
Another man said, “Ignore him darlin’.
Just sit on my lap.” But I’m not one of those
 
who’s hungriest in the morning,
unlike the man at the bakery
who eats egg after egg after egg.
 
Listen. Come over: the cold has already eaten
the summer. I need another pair of ears:
from the kitchen I can’t tell if I’m hearing wind chimes
 
or some gray woman with failing arms
dropping a pan full of onions and potatoes.
                                    This morning I need four hands—
 
two to wash the greens, one to lift a teakettle,
one to pour the milk. This morning, one little mouth
will not do. We could play a game
 
where we crouch on the tiles, two yellow dogs
drinking coffee from bowls. We could play a game
where we let the breakfast burn.
 
Outside there’s a world where every love scene
begins with a man in a doorway;
he walks over to the woman and says “Open your mouth.”
~~~
I know what my heart is like       Since your love died: It is like a hollow ledge Holding a little pool       Left there by the tide,       A little tepid pool, Drying inward from the edge.
~~~
Flour on the floor makes my sandals 
slip and I tumble into your arms. 
Too hot to bake this morning but
blueberries begged me to fold them
into moist muffins. Sticks of rhubarb 
plotted a whole pie. The windows
are blown open and a thickfruit tang
sneaks through the wire screen
and into the home of the scowly lady
who lives next door. Yesterday, a man 
in the city was rescued from his apartment
which was filled with a thousand rats. 
Something about being angry because
his pet python refused to eat. He let the bloom 
of fur rise, rise over the little gnarly blue rug, 
over the coffee table, the kitchen countertops
and pip through each cabinet, snip
at the stumpy bags of sugar,
the cylinders of salt. Our kitchen is a riot
of pots, wooden spoons, melted butter. 
So be it. Maybe all this baking will quiet
the angry voices next door, if only
for a brief whiff. I want our summers
to always be like this—a kitchen wrecked
with love, a table overflowing with baked goods
warming the already warm air. After all the pots
are stacked, the goodies cooled, and all the counters
wiped clean—let us never be rescued from this mess. 
~~~
The day turned into the city and the city turned into the mindand the moving trucks trumbled along like loud worries speaking overthe bicycle’s ideawhich wove between the more armored vehicles of expressionand over planks left by the construction workerson a holiday morning when no work was being donebecause no matter the day, we tend towards remaking parts of it—what we said or did, or how we looked—and the buildings were like faceslining the banks of a paradeobstructing and highlighting each otherdefining height and width for each otheroffsetting grace and functionlike Audrey Hepburn from Jesse Owens, and the hearty pigeons collaborate with wrought iron fencesand become recurring choruses of memoryreassembling around bencheswe sat in once, while seagulls wheel like immigrating thoughts, and never-leavingchickadees hop bared hedges and low treeslike commas and semicolons, landingwhere needed, separating subjects from adjectives, stringing alongthe long ideas, showing how the cagehas no door, and the lights changedso the tide of sound ebbed and returnedlike our own breathand when I knew everythingwas going to look the same as the mindI stopped at a lively cornerwhere the signs themselves were likeperpendicular dialects in conversation andI put both my feet on the groundtook the bag from the basketso pleased it had not been crushedby the mightiness of all elsethat goes on and gave you the sentence inside.
~~~
To say screw them, to be screw-them
bent on one thing all but lost,
one music or mystery,
beyond all the necessary
incidental snaggings of the heart;
to train the whole soul’s beam
on a solitary hill, or on it
a special kind of rock or creeper;
to be sated just by saxophone;
to want nothing but your eyes
lifelong to study Scottish otters:
the snub, slippery-whiskered snout;
the way they intertwine in threes
at play, indistinguishably bound,
long sleek backs submerging away...
To make of this your being’s aim,
its joy, and know by pulse and viscus
the word joy. No gifts but thine
to thyself: thou canst, if thou list,
single out, make good, one wish.
This from the dumb lips of an old god
who with one endless, misty hand
holds out to us too much to love,
and with the other—crooked-fingered,
crazed with veins—some nights and days.
~~~
Cloud cover like a badly made bed, ruched in sections, rushed.
Whatevered for reasons of a lifetime of do-overs. Why bother
trying to change? The gathered duvet sometimes mimics you,
makes double. Dopples a decoy. An escape plan. The safety
of numbers and cover. When the wing dips, a hole in the sky
revealed. Until then, a man in the aisle seat. Calculations
to see if it’s possible to slide through the fisheye window
if he touches your thigh again, your face. We like our planes
fashioned after ships. The illusion one could jump or be forced
off and possibly survive between the distance and everything
that wants to live how it’s always lived. Without compromise.
When does knowing a person begin? Was it when he said
you look like his ex-wife? Hair naturally red, not like yours.
Fake. He can tell, but it’s OK. What your children together
would look like. That if you had been born in Fayetteville,
he would’ve liked to have known you. Feels he does. Not
like the absent husband his mind weds you to. The one who
abandoned you to his company like a firing squad to its post
waiting for a reason to prove worth. The moment he asked
for vodka on the 53-minute flight from Charlotte to Wilmington
to bridge the gap between pre- and post-flight beers. Or how he lifted
his shirt to show you where his lungs had been punctured and once
collapsed, he said he’d briefly died and now is, briefly, alive.
~~~
From golden showers of the ancient skies,
On the first day, and the eternal snow of stars,
You once unfastened giant calyxes
For the young earth still innocent of scars:
 
Young gladioli with the necks of swans,
Laurels divine, of exiled souls the dream,
Vermilion as the modesty of dawns
Trod by the footsteps of the seraphim;
 
The hyacinth, the myrtle gleaming bright,
And, like the flesh of woman, the cruel rose,
Hérodiade blooming in the garden light,
She that from wild and radiant blood arose!
 
And made the sobbing whiteness of the lily
That skims a sea of sighs, and as it wends
Through the blue incense of horizons, palely
Toward the weeping moon in dreams ascends!
 
Hosanna on the lute and in the censers,
Lady, and of our purgatorial groves!
Through heavenly evenings let the echoes answer,
Sparkling haloes, glances of rapturous love!
 
Mother, who in your strong and righteous bosom,
Formed calyxes balancing the future flask,
Capacious flowers with the deadly balsam
For the weary poet withering on the husk.
~~~
on the first day you were beautiful and good
on the second you grew a horn
on the third a lead-gray wing budded
from your shoulder
on the fourth a claw sprouted from your shoe
on the fifth you flew
right into my armpit
built a nest and then lost interest
on the sixth you were a host of leeches
having their way with my veins
on the seventh I heard you
trotting above me with hollow hoof beats
on the eighth you went to moses to ask for advice
winged horned buraq the prophet’s steed
returned as a lamb on the ninth
to graze on my belly fur
on the tenth you died for isaac
the angel decided in favor of animal testing
on the eleventh I had forgotten the color of your eyes
on the twelfth day you were poor and naked
on the thirteenth you were lying on the bottom of the sea
a millions of eons old whispering mussel
on the fourteenth they called you into the field
duldul, ali’s tireless gray mule
on the fifteenth you stood still
welded on the lip of a kettle
the sweat of the holy brew had oxidized
your copper neck
on the sixteenth you were the primordial ox
zarathustra sang of your suffering
on the seventeenth day when I came home
you were once again the one human being
~~~
It’s all the rage to sport waxed moustaches
and cure your own sausages
in some mildewy basement that formerly
would have hosted convulsively
awkward parties with spin the bottle and seven
minutes in the dark and terrifying closet
(aka heaven) but now boasts soppressata
strung on repurposed vintage drying racks
and fat clay pots of kombucha and curdling hops.
Personally I've never recovered from the sex-shaped
void left in those closets by all the groping
that should have occurred to me but didn't:
right under my nose kids my age were creeping
into adulthood one clammy, trembling palm
on one breast at a time. There was also
the horror of not being chosen in gym.
It is conceivable that learning intricately
how to butcher an entire hog
and render every morsel might give one
a feeling of mastery one lacked in childhood.It is the greatest immaturity to believe sufferingentitles you to something someone wiser
and grayer than I once said.
But in those basements and carpools and
playgrounds as I assassinated one by one
clandestinely my torturers
abandoning their foul normal
bodies to compost the astonishing
tedium of the wending suburban lanes,
I was transubstantiating to supernal
fame and beauty and such eerie genius
that entire books were written about my
books. In fact it takes a long time to realize
your suffering is of very little consequence
to anyone but you. And by that time the future
is already happening and you're pickling okra
and starfruit and foraging for morels in urban forests
and suspending artisan mozzarella in little wet nets
and crafting small-batch, nitrite-free data
and maybe even thinking about having
children, which you swore in a million
billion years you would never do.
 
~~~
In sympathy with Gaspara Stampa



By woman so touched, so pressed,
detachment being thought
achievable at all
 
is boggling in itself. Its being
thought achievable by love—but love
for only all (not someone’s single) sentience—
 
appears the precept of too cold
a form of flame. How much
of a hand in things
 
relinquishes the hold
of things-at-hand?
What kiss might such
 
a mind reclaim? A swirl of dust
in Buddhist schools, perhaps.
A view of several solar
 
systems from above.
Not love.
The thought
 
appeals as it appals:
Slow learners, we must spurn
the selving sensualities, to feel
 
for feelers of this kind,
unfasten passion’s burner
to identify what’s under it—
 
in short, must court
dispassion just
to be compassionate.
~~~
Summer road the ring around the lake, we drove mostly in silence.Why aren’t I your wife?
You swerved around a turtle sunning itself.
I wanted to go back. To hold the hot disc of it and place it in the grass.
We were late for dinner.One twentieth of a mile an hour, I said. Claws in tar. You turned the car around.
Traffic from the direction of the turtle, and you saw before I did, the fifty bones of the carapace,
crushed roman dome, the surprise of red blood.
I couldn’t help crying, couldn’t keep anything from harm.I’m sorry, you said, and let it hurt.
The relief, always, of you in the seat beside me, you’ll never know.
Driving that road next winter, you remembered that place in the road. Your turtle.
During hibernation, a turtle’s heart beats once for every ten minutes.
It cannot voluntarily open its eyes.
~~~
1
Desert heat, high clouds, and sky
the color of lapis. On this journey,
anything seems possible,
so we stop by an ancient cottonwood
to kiss. The beauty trembles,
doesn't say a word, just watches
me, so open. Small birds fly by, flock
in the shady tree above us. What
settles in her heart? What congeals?
Hope? Despair? Far off, the river churns
in its sandy banks, swallows veer, turn
in fiery air. Will these kisses seal
her to me? I her lover, she my wife?
Is all of this a dream, my whole life?
 
2
She is just this side of wonderful,
and suddenly the glamorous world
fills itself with shining and we laugh
at highway monuments that explain
how hard the trek had been for Franciscans
in the Indian wilderness, poor fellows—
conversion is the devil's own
work! Then the stones of her dream
turn up under her feet, the back
of a huge land turtle. I know
we must be circling Paradise
because the ants enter the fleshy petals
of the roadside flowers with evident
joy and purpose (oh, my dark, pretty one).
 
3
Music, my adored. When is there never
music? My accordion puffs up
with drinkable melodies. I spill
her tunes into your listening ear,
one after the other: the squeeze-box
enters the dance of the plaintive gypsy
with its hard rhythms, lilts the back-
breaking labor song the worker croons
to earth, warbles romantic notes of
dissolving borders. You melt
like a woman beneath her lover's touch.
Music is happy and pitiless when
it sets fire to combustible souls. Even
the raspy bandoneon's voice is lyric.
 
4
Sacred. Sacred. Sacred. Sacred. (Speak
in a whisper.) We slip into this
space half cognizant. The land is very
large indeed: bones of the earth
worn down, though she is a living thing.
See how she exposes her grace? Antelopes
graze on the far plain—their high,
white tails—the red soil throbs
its slow heartbeat, and the blue sky
clears so smartly, perfectly, like
radiance. Are the ancestors near?
What can we know? We decide
to wander around this prairie, mistaken
for Utes, buy commodities in little towns.
 
5
Late afternoon we head west along the willow-banked
Malheur after the long curve of the Snake River plain.
(Above the falls where the Shoshone went to pray
we soaked our feet in cold water, and I observed
the arch of her brown foot.) Rabbitbrush and sage
along the highway, juniper on far hills and bluffs.
Sundown, and dusk falls over the wide basin of land.
In Burns we eat eggs in a cafe, take a room
in the Motel 6. In the dark, I can see
her black hair, black against the pillows. Its clean
scent makes me think of corn. At dawn, I hold her
and there are kisses. Then more kisses. Then more.
The day is cold; a north wind blew last night. But
the land is open. Rain falls in showers of light.
 
6
Her hand on my thigh, my shoulder,
in my hair. She leans over to kiss my cheek.
We look at each other, smile. For miles
we travel this way, nearly silent, point
with eyes or chins at the circling hawk, the king-
fisher on the snag above the swollen
creek. One night I weep in her arms
as she cries, "Oh, oh, oh!" because I have touched
her scars lightly: throat, belly, breasts.
In that communion of lovers, thick sobs
break from me as I think of my love
back home, all that I have done
and cannot say. This is the first time
I have left her so completely, so alone.
 
~~~
            Poca favilla gran fiamma seconda. – Dante
           
            Ogni altra cosa, ogni pensier va fore,
            E sol ivi con voi rimansi amore. – Petrarca 



I loved you first: but afterwards your love
Outsoaring mine, sang such a loftier song
As drowned the friendly cooings of my dove.
Which owes the other most? my love was long,
And yours one moment seemed to wax more strong;
I loved and guessed at you, you construed me
And loved me for what might or might not be –
Nay, weights and measures do us both a wrong.
For verily love knows not ‘mine’ or ‘thine;’
With separate ‘I’ and ‘thou’ free love has done,
For one is both and both are one in love:
Rich love knows nought of ‘thine that is not mine;’
Both have the strength and both the length thereof,
Both of us, of the love which makes us one.
~~~
And to the curious I say, Don’t be naïve.The soul, like a trinket, is a she.I lay down in the tweed of one man that first frost night.I did not like the wool of  him.You have one mitochondrial speck of evidence on your cleat.They can take you down for that.Did I forget to mention that when you’re deadYou’re dead a long time.My uncle, dying, told me this when asked, Why stay here for such suffering.A chimney swift flits through the fumatorium. I long for one last Blue democracy, Which has broke my heart a while.How many minutes have I left, the lover asked, To still be beautiful?I took his blond face in my hands and kissed him blondly                                                                                      On his mouth.
~~~
Oh, come to me in dreams, my love!
 I will not ask a dearer bliss;Come with the starry beams, my love,
 And press mine eyelids with thy kiss.’Twas thus, as ancient fables tell,
 Love visited a Grecian maid,Till she disturbed the sacred spell,
 And woke to find her hopes betrayed.But gentle sleep shall veil my sight,
 And Psyche’s lamp shall darkling be,When, in the visions of the night,
 Thou dost renew thy vows to me.Then come to me in dreams, my love,
 I will not ask a dearer bliss;Come with the starry beams, my love,
 And press mine eyelids with thy kiss.
~~~
Now that I know
How passion warms little
Of flesh in the mould,
And treasure is brittle,—
 
I’ll lie here and learn
How, over their ground,
Trees make a long shadow
And a light sound.
 
~~~
I am always hungry

& wanting to have

sex. This is a fact.

If you get right

down to it the new

unprocessed peanut

butter is no damn

good & you should

buy it in a jar as

always in the

largest supermarket

you know. And

I am an enemy

of change, as

you know. All

the things I

embrace as new

are in

fact old things,

re-released: swimming,

the sensation of

being dirty in

body and mind

summer as a

time to do

nothing and make

no money. Prayer

as a last re-

sort. Pleasure

as a means,

and then a

means again

with no ends

in sight. I am

absolutely in opposition

to all kinds of

goals. I have

no desire to know           

where this, anything

is getting me.

When the water

boils I get

a cup of tea.

Accidentally I

read all the

works of Proust.

It was summer

I was there

so was he. I

write because

I would like

to be used for

years after

my death. Not

only my body

will be compost

but the thoughts

I left during

my life. During

my life I was

a woman with

hazel eyes. Out

the window

is a crooked

silo. Parts

of your

body I think

of as stripes

which I have

learned to

love along. We

swim naked

in ponds &

I write be-

hind your

back. My thoughts

about you are

not exactly

forbidden, but

exalted because

they are useless,

not intended

to get you

because I have

you & you love

me. It’s more

like a playground

where I play

with my reflection

of you until

you come back

and into the

real you I

get to sink

my teeth. With

you I know how

to relax. &

so I work

behind your

back. Which

is lovely.

Nature

is out of control

you tell me &

that’s what’s so

good about

it. I’m immoderately

in love with you,

knocked out by

all your new

white hair

 

why shouldn’t

something

I have always

known be the

very best there

is. I love

you from my

childhood,

starting back

there when

one day was

just like the

rest, random

growth and

breezes, constant

love, a sand-

wich in the

middle of

day,

a tiny step

in the vastly

conventional

path of

the Sun. I

squint. I

wink. I

take the

ride.
~~~
 Larry Levan (snake), 2006, by Elia Alba 
Hip hip hip hip hip makes the man
as the conga, serpentine, slides across the frame 
and the disco dub — tilt and sway — 
sewing pelves in the room, as if  Larry, still, 
were levitating streetwise
Blacks, Drags, Latinos, Punks: Saturday Mass, 1985, 
in the Paradise Garage — Evelyn
“Champagne” King, Kraftwerk, Ashra. 
No. He’s black-and-white, a head shot,
one two three four five, 
on this S curve of 21st-century revelers,
mask on the one body down, 
shimmer slant of a hoop earring
under the ten-leg- hop-and-pulsate —  
glide on through. And Larry, Dour Father,
bubble pop-popped, afloat, 
asking repeatedly: Who, My Friends, is fronting? Who is not?  You, Velvet Valance, over the sequined  drag of curtain. Black is Black,  Brown is Brown, Gay is Gay disco  pulsing up and through seventeen years of not-forbidding bodies. Introibo

ad altare Dei. Ad Deum qui lætificat 
juventutem meam. Gather you  to me and to one another. Grind.
~~~
Once, Iwas seven Spanish bullocks in a high meadow,sleepy and nameless. As-ifness strange to myself, but complete.Light on the neck-napeof timeas two wings of one starling, or lovers so happy neither needs think of the other.
~~~
Brighter than fireflies upon the Uji River Are your words in the dark, Beloved. 
~~~
for Dylan



I watch the ocean square into a turning
Burn. Burning, my holes glass over. Lightning
Hits the beach, melts me shut. I’ve drowned
Before, in the bye along a row of shored
 
Rocks. From the barrel chest butcher I buy
Tight roasts. This year’s man, his clownish dog walks me
In the park until I die on his leash and domestic
Night’s sticky seizures. I thumb and ♥ it
 
Like liking a million times. The rich own long
Lighthouses to show us how away from them
We are. Past waiting for the press of his chest
To my back, I hobby along to the next hem’s
 
Promise. Again I straddle the blade thinking
This is the time it will fill the gash. 
 
~~~
Or will we be lost forever?
In the silence of the last breath
Not taken
The blue sweep of your arm like a dancer
Clowning, in wrinkled pajamas,
Across the sky the abrupt
Brief zigzag of a jay...
All night the whiteness
And all day.
Once we have been lifted up
Into empty morning like ice
In the darkness of these white fields
Neither the ghost tracks of skis
Nor steel skates will wake us
Where are we looking for each other, separated
On the opposite hillside I see you
Miles away from me, a dot
Of faint color reddening, small bruised warmth
Opening its cranberry mouth and saying,
What are you saying?
                                        *
Under a cold blanket
An immense loneliness stretches
In every direction with no fences.
A few sticks tweak the crusted snow:
Thin remnants of an army
Of lost soldiers.
I see footsteps ahead of me but whose
And where will they lead me, parallel
Or converging? Is it not possible there will be one jet trail
That will not vanish,
Two phantom ribbons unfolding
That will not feather themselves away?
                                       *
Wrapped in our white parkas
In what shifting laminations, snowflakes
That mean nothing, transparent eyes spitting,
What glacier will we choose to lie on,
In what igloo rest
Barely breathing, in an air pocket
Just below the surface
Rustling beneath blizzards
Where is your foot, most beautiful
With blue toenails
I will be looking for it always
Wherever it is, next to me
In the darkness
Of rumpled white sheets,
Pale siftings, clouds
Sudden scarves of ourselves gusting
Loose, sandpapery as snow lifting
In what chill citadel of ice crystals
Will I find you?
~~~
Once, there was a year where every romance
    had fangs. It was hard to open up a novel
without a vampire bearing down on a young, virgin neck.
Soon, they were on the television. Later, the sidewalks.
    Teenagers. They owned us with their hackneyed plots.
Platinum fleur-de-lis emblazoned on their jeans.How do they wash them? I asked. They don’t,
    my friend said. It’s part of what keeps them so dark and stiff.
An entire generation has arrived dark and stiff. Unlike
my pliable, light, pubescent years. I grew up reading    Little House on the Prairie. Sweet, blind Mary
stole my heart. Turn the page. Oklahoma. Wild mustangs.
Malaria. And Pa. Talk about a hero. Now they have boys
    so angry they transform into wild, shirtless dogs.
They are maniacs, these fans. They beg their mothers
to drive them to the theater where they burst
    into dollars and popcorn in their seats. They want the car
tossed off their withering girl bodies. Lured from
their couches, they are eager to be taken from their lives
    and placed directly in the vampire’s mouth. Younger
and younger. Cha-ching. Is there nothing anyone can do?
~~~
November 2015
                         1
Open up for close
out    soul-clothes    every-
thing has to go    closing
down time    call them all
saints    souls    my own gone
ones:  Andy    Marcia    Mary Alice
Mary Anne     cloud of all    carried out
 
2 
outside my window: locust, cloth
of gold     on the ground: its yellow
tabs   linden hearts   sweetgum stars
like cut-outs from the same ...    
paper-napkin ghosts in a tree near
the house where a year ago my friend — 
rust-colored chrysanthemums   rust-colored door
 
3 
door to door the angel no the Lord
passed or did not pass — 
the angel opened the prison
door     doors to pass through, out
or in:  our millions, more than any — 
in the other story the Lord
said:  to put a difference between
 
4 
between one and another
a gun:  at one end it’s a good
gun because at the other’s a cell
phone pill bottle toy gun nothing a
Trayvon    Tamir    Dontre    Michael
Laquan    Eric    Rekia    John:    call
them out and the others, black and many
 
5 many thousand gone    no
more auction block
~~~
You shout my name
from beyond my dreams,
beyond the picture window
of this Rosarito beach house.
Rushing from bed to shore
I glimpse their backs—
volcanoes rising out of the sea.
Your back, a blue-black silhouette,
feet wet with the wash of morning waves.
Fountains spring from mammal minds,
my hands lifting a splash of sand.
I'm on my knees,
toes finding a cool prayer
beneath them, fingers pressing
sea foam to my temples,
while you open arms wide as a generation,
raise them to a compass point,
dive.
If you could reach them,
you would ride their fins
under the horizon,
then surf the crash of waves
left in their wake.
And if I could grasp
my own fear,
I'd drown it,
leave it breathless and blue
as this ocean,
as the brilliant backs
of whales
surfacing
for air.
~~~
My child is sitting cross-legged on the floor reading to herself.
Sometimes she is so full of need I push her to the floor.
Only once I did that and I don’t even remember the moment
right, but I was trying to wipe urine off my leg and she was
naughty like a squirrel and jumping and singing and her head
slammed into my chin, which hurt and even more than that,
it pissed me off, because she’s my beautiful child, but in that
button snap of a moment she was suddenly just one more person
and I pushed her away in a way that felt to me like setting her
down, but awkwardly, because of how she was also balancing
her feet on my feet as I tried to pour out a bowl of pee
from her little potty as a toothbrush dangled foaming
from my mouth. Somewhere in the mess of that morning
she’d become person enough to, in the space between us,
create force of momentum, and then I did not set her down,
but pushed her and she fell away from it against the wall
and was crying because I, her mommy, pushed her. And I know
this should be the poem about how I’m horrified at myself,
the poem about what in ourselves we have to live with,
but in that moment which followed two years of breastfeeding
and baby-wearing and sixty-nine hours of natural childbirth
and the hemorrhaging and the uncertain operation, after which
I pumped every two hours, careful not to let the cord tangle
in the IV. Even then when she cried and no matter what
and no matter and no matter and no matter and no matter what,
I held her all night if she cried so she would not ever know
someday you’ll cry alone, but I held her and ached and leaked
and bled too as long as it took. Of course there’ve been nights
since but sometimes it feels as if I’ve never been asleep again,
so when I say I pushed my two-year-old against a wall and I don’t
remember it happening that way but it happened and I did
and I’ve been wondering a long time now what the limit is
and when I would find the end of myself, and that day, which
was yesterday, was the end. And this day, when we played
hide-and-seek with Daddy, and touched bugs, and readFrog and Toad Are Friends twice together before she read it
to herself as I wrote this, this is the day that comes after.
~~~
I love your lips when they’re wet with wine
  And red with a wild desire;I love your eyes when the lovelight lies
  Lit with a passionate fire.I love your arms when the warm white flesh
  Touches mine in a fond embrace;I love your hair when the strands enmesh
  Your kisses against my face.Not for me the cold, calm kiss
  Of a virgin’s bloodless love;Not for me the saint’s white bliss,
  Nor the heart of a spotless dove.But give me the love that so freely gives
  And laughs at the whole world’s blame,With your body so young and warm in my arms,
  It sets my poor heart aflame.So kiss me sweet with your warm wet mouth,
  Still fragrant with ruby wine,And say with a fervor born of the South
  That your body and soul are mine.Clasp me close in your warm young arms,
  While the pale stars shine above,And we’ll live our whole young lives away
  In the joys of a living love.
~~~
on seventeen, I come from hearty straw.My grandpa wore a gallonhat. My grandma, like a shogun,bun and shawl. For their honeymoon,they went to the movies. No oneknows what they saw.You arrive with licorice, cigarettes,the documentary on Woody Allen.Don’t feign a passion for his startin tv, or his clarinets,or Love and Death. Just skip to the Soon-Yi part.
~~~
They came to tell your faults to me,They named them over one by one;I laughed aloud when they were done,I knew them all so well before, —Oh, they were blind, too blind to seeYour faults had made me love you more.
~~~
They are thin
and rarely marry, living out
their long lives
in spacious rooms, French doors
giving view to formal gardens
where aromatic flowers
grow in profusion.
They play their pianos
in the late afternoon
tilting their heads
at a gracious angle
as if listening
to notes pitched above
the human range.
Age makes them translucent;
each palpitation of their hearts
visible at temple or neck.
When they die, it’s in their sleep,
their spirits shaking gently loose
from a hostess too well bred
to protest.
~~~
the city has sex with megan
 when the air shaped like the inverse of Megan
accepts Megan as she moves.
    If Megan is a system of exchange
that floats her labor and her point
  of view in vapor/liquid soup
passàging through her valves
and if her later corpse, collapsing,
 updates its inversion of the air
 even more than did the air displace
when she grew from brown-eyed baby
into strong laboring woman in blue jeans
  and heathered wool,
and if the air and earth draw from Megan’s corpse
  all the energy and minerals
 she pulled from her surrounds
to build her nails and bones and teeth—
 if the exchange doesn’t stop
but only ceases to support her consciousness,
 and if her consciousness was corpse anyway until
it found relation,
 then what demises
is the potential for the human social,
and another sociality
 will unbutton my whole shoe
and tongue hang limp,
  what sex is for but stops me
 at the barrier, a pixelated
glamour reef though very
   close and simple, smell a
  flurry, parapluie paraphrase,
 energy funneled through a shape.
You filtered chemical
 information in such a pointy
fulgent scrambled way, in the city
    and outside the city in the vernal zones
   and aqua zones the city shaped, flow-charted, realist
 trucked. The city caved under
     when the zones rose and lapped around the pilings,
 manged foundations green,
      rotted the teeth out of the mouth of the city,
 harbor high-rises
dark and blown. The city is extremely fragile tender
 human mesh and will be mush
    and mushrooms grow in, there is room in, ruins
roam the rearticulated harm.speech by a flaneur—no a flaneuse—
On my face, D. folliculorum are relaxing
 like Tenniel caterpillars leaning on mushroom stalks
  against the bases of my hair follicles
 which provide shelter and shade.
These critters are peculiar to
   the ecology of the human face
     which I take around the city
     open, close   it is my means
    of feeding   I rely on
  changing its shape
in response to others’ faces and postures
  to reduce my risk and increase my safety
   and my likelihood of being
    included in the group’s collective
      life. I smile a lot and hope it
     don’t look fake.
~~~
My transgressions pile against the garden wall(built when Rome began to weaken, scarred by a cannonball.) I gossiped; I snubbed a dinner guest. I watch until the wall writhes with awful feral cats fed by shrunken widows and the odd librarian. I’ve begun to be depleted by your absence; one of  love’s worst symptoms. For years, I’d had the sense to hold myself apart. I’ve been here long enough to kill two mint plants and a lavender, then resurrect their better part.I’d like to let you die on the vine. Not you, the You I Dream, who follows through on waking. See how the watcher sees the storm but doesn’t get wet. Be that. Be what? Be wiser than the heart.
~~~
No more alone sleeping, no more alone waking,
 Thy dreams divided, thy prayers in twain;Thy merry sisters tonight forsaking,
 Never shall we see, maiden, again.Never shall we see thee, thine eyes glancing.
 Flashing with laughter and wild in glee,Under the mistletoe kissing and dancing,
 Wantonly free.There shall come a matron walking sedately,
  Low-voiced, gentle, wise in reply.Tell me, O tell me, can I love her greatly?
 All for her sake must the maiden die!
~~~
walking to the hospital How the autumn dawn burned throughthe misty broods and settled down in fire;how quickly the sun glittered my shadow,how my shadow cried, a moment, with joy.A light frost, a vision of light cracklingdown the maples, down the tinder ash.I was the good thief. I held my Love’ssweet breath, his beautiful, intelligent gaze.I closed my eyes and he woke inside me.When I saw, he saw the inflamed world.A bird sang deeply from the gutter eaves.When I closed my eyes I was elsewhere.I walked through the fire of his sleep.leaving early My Love,    tonight Fionnuala is your nurse. You’ll hear her voice sing-song around the ward lifting a wing at the shore of your darkness. I heard that, in another life, she too journeyed through a storm, a kind of curse, with the ocean rising darkly around her, fierce with cold, and no resting place, only the frozen rocks that tore her feet, the light on her shoulders. And no cure there but to wait it out. If, while I’m gone, your fever comes down— if the small, salt-laden shapes of her song appear as a first glimmer of earth-light, follow the sweet, hopeful voice of that landing. She will keep you safe beneath her wing.in your sleep After “The Lark Ascending” by Ralph Vaughan Williams The moment the lark finally vanishes into the spread green sky of the forest is the moment you suddenly lift your bruised arm up, over your body, as though to show me the wing’s eclipse, or the wing, or the season of your dream. And even as your hand lapses silent onto your chest, and your breath goes sluggish, I am already watching your feet prepare their slow first step under the sheet as the last notes of sunlight fall quiet, and you do not move again. My love, are you a bird reviving in a summer field? Was it the lark ascending that you heard, a ghost among its shy-hearted tunes? Yes. I heard the lark escaping, too.
~~~
Flashing in the grass; the mouth of a spider clung   
          to the dark of it: the legs of the spider   
held the tucked wings close,
          held the abdomen still in the midst of calling   
with thrusts of phosphorescent light—
When I am tired of being human, I try to remember
          the two stuck together like burrs. I try to place them   
central in my mind where everything else must
          surround them, must see the burr and the barb of them.   
There is courtship, and there is hunger. I suppose
          there are grips from which even angels cannot fly.   
Even imagined ones. Luciferin, luciferase.
          When I am tired of only touching,
I have my mouth to try to tell you
          what, in your arms, is not erased.
~~~
I’ll go anywhere to leave you but come with me.
All the cities are like you anyway. Windows
darken when I get close enough to see.
Any place we want to stay’s polluted,
the good spots taken already by those
who ruin them. And restaurants we’d never find.
We’d rut a ditch by a river in nights
so long they must be cut by the many pairs
of wrong-handled scissors maybe god owns
and doesn’t share. I water god.
I make a haunted lake and rinse and rinse.
I take what I want, and have ever since what
I want disappeared, like anything hunted.
That’s what you said. Disappointment
isn’t tender, dried and wide instead.
The tourists snapped you crying,
and the blanket I brought was so dirty
it must have been lying around
in lice and blood that whole year we fought.
It wasn’t clear, so I forgot.
I haven’t been sleeping, next to you
twitching to bury my boring eyes.
The ship made you sad, and the ferry, and canoe.
All boats do.
~~~
I want to write my lover a poem
but a very bad one. It'll include
a giant squid and some loose change
 
and cuff links and two blue ferries chugging
headfirst on the East River at twenty-six knots
and only at the last minute averting
 
disaster through quick thinking and sure reflexes. Also
a bow and arrow and glossy red apple
I perch in front of my heart. To be honest
 
my lover doesn't really like poetry,
which I guess is why I plan to write
such a bad one, so he can feel right
 
and strong and good in his beliefs.
Tonight when I go see my lover
he’ll hold me as I've never been held
 
except by him and then I'll have to give him
back. When you get new things
you treat them like glass for a while
 
and then get used to them
and manhandle them
like everything else.
 
I don't want to give him back
but partly it's not up to me and
partly I don't want to be his
 
old sofa. I want to radiate and gleam
arrestingly until the certain, premature
end. You can compose a whole life
 
out of these rollercoasters.
You can be everywhere
and nowhere, over and over
life slapping you in the face
 till you’re newly burnished
flat-out gasping and awake.
 
~~~
Time only cause of my unrestBy whom I hop’d once to bee blest    How cruell art thou turned?That first gav’st lyfe unto my love,And still a pleasure nott to move    Or change though ever burned;Have I thee slack’d, or left undunOne loving rite, and soe have wunn    Thy rage or bitter changing?That now noe minutes I shall see,Wherein I may least happy bee    Thy favors soe estranging.Blame thy self, and nott my folly,Time gave time butt to bee holly;    True love such ends best lovethUnworhty love doth seeke for endsA worthy love butt worth pretends    Nor other thoughts itt proveth:Then stay thy swiftnes cruell time,And lett mee once more blessed clime    To joy, that I may prayse thee:Lett mee pleasure sweetly tastingJoy in love, and faith nott wasting    And on fames wings I’le rayse thee:Never shall thy glory dyingBee untill thine owne untying    That time noe longer liveth;T’is a gaine such tyme to lend:Since soe thy fame shall never end    Butt joy for what she giveth.
~~~
A peacock on an olive branch looks beyond
the grove to the road, beyond the road to the sea,
blank-lit, where a sailboat anchors to a cove.
As it is morning, below deck a man is pouring water into a cup,
listening to the radio-talk of the ships: barges dead
in the calms awaiting port call, pleasure boats whose lights
hours ago went out, fishermen setting their nets for mullet,
as summer tavernas hang octopus to dry on their lines,
whisper smoke into wood ovens, sweep the terraces
clear of night, putting the music out with morning
light, and for the breath of an hour it is possible
to consider the waters of this sea wine-dark, to remember
that there was no word for blue among the ancients,
but there was the whirring sound before the oars
of the great triremes sang out of the seam of world,
through pine-sieved winds silvered by salt flats until
they were light enough to pass for breath from the heavens,
troubled enough to fell ships and darken thought — 
then as now the clouds pass, roosters sleep in their huts,
the sea flattens under glass air, but there is nothing to hold us there:
not the quiet of marble nor the luff of sail, fields of thyme,
a vineyard at harvest, and the sea filled with the bones of those
in flight from wars east and south, our wars, their remains
scavenged on the seafloor and in its caves, belongings now
a flotsam washed to the rocks. Stand here and look
into the distant haze, there where the holy mountain
with its thousand monks wraps itself in shawls of rain,
then look to the west, where the rubber boats tipped
into the tough waves. Rest your eyes there, remembering the words
of Anacreon, himself a refugee of war, who appears
in the writings of Herodotus:I love and do not love, I am mad and I am not mad.
Like you he thought himself not better,
nor worse than anyone else.
~~~
With my ear to the door
of my cell. And my want
like a comb in my hair.
Like a veil where there is no
veil. With a ring in my ear.
A ring in the hole in my ear.
I rap at the door of my will
and the door of my want
as to will them away. My
want like a veil on the floor.
I appear at the door of my
will with a veil in my hand
and a comb in my hair.
My want like a hole that
I bore in the floor.
Where my will is more
feeling than veil, and my veil
is more want for a veil
than a veil. I wear the comb
of my fear in my hair.
My veil is as thin as my want,
and my want is as thin
as a hair. When I curl up my
want in the curl of my hair.
When I curl up on the floor
of the cell of my want.
I bear my fear in my cells
like I’m bearing a ring.
Like I’m curled up inside
of the ring in my ear.
I rap at my want for a door
where there is no door.
A will where there is no will.
At my want for unveiling.
My will to unveil it. The curve
of my will and my ear
to the door. With the curl
of my ear to the door. Not
the door but my fear of the door.
~~~
My mare, when she was in heat,
would travel the fenceline for hours,
wearing the impatience
in her feet into the ground.
Not a stallion for miles, I’d assure her,
give it up.
She’d widen her nostrils,
sieve the wind for news, be moving again,
her underbelly darkening with sweat,
then stop at the gate a moment, wait
to see what I might do.
Oh, I knew
how it was for her, easily
recognized myself in that wide lust:
came to stand in the pasture
just to see it played.
Offered a hand, a bucket of grain—
a minute’s distraction from passion
the most I gave.
Then she’d return to what burned her:
the fence, the fence,
so hoping I might see, might let her free.
I’d envy her then,
to be so restlessly sure
of heat, and need, and what it takes
to feed the wanting that we are—
only a gap to open
the width of a mare,
the rest would take care of itself.
Surely, surely I knew that,
who had the power of bucket
and bridle—
she would beseech me, sidle up,
be gone, as life is short.
But desire, desire is long.
~~~
Do I still long for my virginity?— Fragment 107



I never longed for my virginity.I heard it on the radio after the hurricane. There, in the aftermath, was the voice of a man —once the sweet, screwed-up boy whose hooded, jessed spirit I tried to possess with the ruthlessness I mistook for power. Here he was on NPR, so gentle, so familiar with devastation, his timbre woke the teenage falconer in me who once saw his kindness as weakness, saw a boy as an unfledged goshawk —a creature to trap and be trapped within darkened mews. I knew the rules: neither of us could sleep until the molting bird grew ravenous enough to take the raw mouse from my hand. Breaking the falconbroke us both, left us scared and less aware of  love than fear.
~~~
I grieve and dare not show my discontent,
I love and yet am forced to seem to hate,
I do, yet dare not say I ever meant,
I seem stark mute but inwardly do prate.
I am and not, I freeze and yet am burned,
Since from myself another self I turned.
My care is like my shadow in the sun,
Follows me flying, flies when I pursue it,
Stands and lies by me, doth what I have done.
His too familiar care doth make me rue it.
No means I find to rid him from my breast,
Till by the end of things it be supprest.
Some gentler passion slide into my mind,
For I am soft and made of melting snow;
Or be more cruel, love, and so be kind.
Let me or float or sink, be high or low.
Or let me live with some more sweet content,
Or die and so forget what love ere meant.
~~~
When the man behind the counter said, “You pay

by the orifice,” what could we do but purchase them all?

 

Ah, Sandy, you were clearly the deluxe doll, modish and pert

in your plastic nurse whites, official hostess to our halcyon days,

 

where you bobbed in the doorway of our dishabille apartment,

a block downwind from the stockyards. Holding court on

 

the corroded balcony, K. and I passed hash brownies, collecting

change for the building’s monthly pool to predict which balcony

 

would fall off next. That’s when K. was fucking M. and M. was

fucking J., and even B. and I threw down once on the glass-speckled

 

lawn, adrift in the headlights of his El Camino. Those were immortal

times, Sandy! Coke wasn’t addictive yet, condoms prevented herpes

 

and men were only a form of practice for the Russian novel

we foolishly hoped our lives would become. Now it’s a Friday night,

 

sixteen years from there. Don’t the best characters know better

than to live too long? My estranged husband house-sits for a spoiled
 

cockatoo while saving to buy his own place. My lover’s gone back

to his gin and the farm-team fiancée he keeps in New York.

 

What else to do but read Frank O’Hara to my tired three-year-old?

When I put him to bed, he mutters “more sorry” as he turns into sleep.

 

Tonight, I find you in a box I once marked “The Past.” Well,

therapy’s good for some things, Sandy, but who’d want to forgive

 

a girl like that? Frank says Destroy yourself if you don’t know!

Deflated, you’re simply the smile that surrounds a hole.

                                                                                     I don’t know anything.
~~~
It seems a certain fear underlies everything.
If I were to tell you something profound
it would be useless, as every single thing I know
is not timeless. I am particularly risk-averse.
I choose someone else over me every time,
as I'm sure they'll finish the task at hand,
which is to say that whatever is in front of us
will get done if I'm not in charge of it.
There is a limit to the number of times
I can practice every single kind of mortification
(of the flesh?). I can turn toward you and say yes,
it was you in the poem
~~~
Again this morning my eyes woke up too close
to your eyes,
their almost green orbs
too heavy-lidded to really look back.
To wake up next to you
is ordinary. I do not even need to look at you
to see you.
But I do look. So when you come to me
in your opulent sadness, I see
you do not want me
to unbutton you
so I cannot do the one thing
I can do.
Now it is almost one a.m. I am still at my desk
and you are upstairs at your desk a staircase
away from me. Already it is years
of you a staircase
away from me. To be near you
and not near you
is ordinary.
You
are ordinary.
Still, how many afternoons have I spent
peeling blue paint from
our porch steps, peering above
hedgerows, the few parked cars for the first
glimpse of you. How many hours under
the overgrown, pink Camillas, thinking
the color was wrong for you, thinking
you'd appear
after my next
blink.
Soon you'll come down the stairs
to tell me something. And I'll say,
okay. Okay. I'll say it
like that, say it just like
that, I'll go on being
your never-enough.
It's not the best in you
I long for. It's when you're noteless,
numb at the ends of my fingers, all is
all. I say it is.
~~~
It has been so wet stones glaze in moss;
everything blooms coldly.
I expect you. I thought one night it was you
at the base of the drive, you at the foot of the stairs,
you in a shiver of light, but each time
leaves in wind revealed themselves,
the retreating shadow of a fox, daybreak.
We expect you, cat and I, bluebirds and I, the stove.
In May we dreamed of wreaths burning on bonfires
over which young men and women leapt.
June efforts quietly.
I’ve planted vegetables along each garden wall
so even if spring continues to disappoint
we can say at least the lettuce loved the rain.
I have new gloves and a new hoe.
I practice eulogies. He was a hawk
with white feathered legs. She had the quiet ribs
of a salamander crossing the old pony post road.
Yours is the name the leaves chatter
at the edge of the unrabbited woods.
~~~
Open the window and you want to fly out,
though you never actually do—
I think I see you, still there on the ledge,
where I've left you.
How pulled-awake and flung
can one life be?
Again I thought, It will end.
Again I promised and clung.
I learned there that
to cling was in my nature.
I think I see you, though you flash
quickly through the shutter.
I think I hear you, though I sleep.
Remember this as a bolero,
a finite flaring—
both the tulip tree
burning in full bloom
and the weeping silver birch.
~~~
In the northwest corner of Dakota, I saw a room someone had left, a plush sofa returning its button-eyed stare to the glance she gave it over her shoulder, the dog, too, turning. In the next room, the mattress,with mattress stories one after another tumbling out of each spring, the window she opened first thing, its vista of mile after mile, and the windmill hauling its load. 
               I saw that, and nothing alive—green oil-figured linoleum laid on counters,nails of bad craft, the ripped blackening edge that scared her more than the bed and the sound of the windmill winning its will from the aquifer night after night, the whack of her blade on the block. There are houses with too many knives sometimes she said, but when June ferned its way in she'd relent, take on its restraint, heave again on the stained sheets her burden of child, herself a torn girl again, combing her hair through fingers bruised by corn shocks, sweet juice in the cuts of her life.
                                        She began to think of the border and mustangs without brand. At night they'd bend over the bed and nuzzle. One ride was enough. She had sufficient magic to cling to a mane and fare over the windowsill. I see where the curtain fell and nobody mended the tear, I see where bare feet marked like fossils her pass in the rain.When he uncovers fiddleheads by the spring,why does he always think of that first sight of her thigh in the peach-colored dress, of his hand'ssearching moss with its red-gold stamens, the spring in that arid landscape like something from Canaan under his tongue? Even in old age he'd ponder the moment,lying under the moon forgiving himself, her, the world that bred their conundrum, washed in that rain.
~~~
When you walked in
it was like recognizing
 
the moon when he returns.
His lover bites his cheek; she
 
has no choice. All we see
is the dissolution, then await
 
the reconstruction.
Each time, the sky
 
yanks her into his orbit.
I want to say I’m sorry.
 
I want to sayYou win. Our bodies are like
 
the confessional booth these
poems are stuck in. Even
 
the priest can see that sin.
You’ll be all spit and honey—
 
or maybe I’m the poisoned
flower gnawing on its own
 
lip because it has no hands
to reach for you. Only words
 
that are as useless as the pollen
for saying anything. I continue
 
to serve them even with your hands
around my throat from across
 
the room. Your voice is home,
I answer it like a bat guided
 
across the atmosphere. This
is a narrative that cannot end
 
well but wants to, but must.
I’ll continue to go down kicking
 
and you’ll be sweet as anything
until you bite back. No, it can’t
 
end here—we won’t let it.
Billions of years have passed
 
since an asteroid last hit
the moon: clearly some
 
magnetic fields can be sustained.
~~~
                             I
Whoever despises the clitoris despises the penis
Whoever despises the penis despises the cunt
Whoever despises the cunt despises the life of the child.
Resurrection music,        silence,        and surf.
                             II
No longer speaking
Listening with the whole body
And with every drop of blood
Overtaken by silence
But this same silence is become speech
With the speed of darkness.
                             III
Stillness during war, the lake.
The unmoving spruces.
Glints over the water.
Faces, voices.        You are far away.
A tree that trembles.
I am the tree that trembles and trembles.
                             IV
After the lifting of the mist
after the lift of the heavy rains
the sky stands clear
and the cries of the city risen in day
I remember the buildings are space
walled, to let space be used for living
I mind this room is space
this drinking glass is space
whose boundary of glass
lets me give you drink and space to drink
your hand, my hand being space
containing skies and constellations
your face
carries the reaches of air
I know I am space
my words are air.
                              V
Between        between
the man : act        exact
woman : in curve        senses in their maze
frail orbits, green tries,           games of stars
shape of the body speaking its evidence
                               VI
I look across at the real
vulnerable        involved        naked
devoted to the present of all I care for
the world of its history leading to this moment.
                              VII
Life the announcer.
I assure you
there are many ways to have a child.
I bastard mother
promise you
there are many ways to be born.
They all come forth
in their own grace.
                              VIII
Ends of the earth join tonight
with blazing stars upon their meeting.
These sons,        these sons
fall burning into Asia.
                               IX
Time comes into it.
Say it.        Say it.
The universe is made of stories,
not of atoms.
                                X
Lying
blazing beside me
you rear beautifully and up—
your thinking face—
erotic body reaching
in all its colors and lights—
your erotic face
colored and lit—
not colored body-and-face
but now entire,
colors       lights       the world thinking and reaching.
                               XI
The river flows past the city.
Water goes down to tomorrow
making its children        I hear their unborn voices
I am working out the vocabulary of my silence.
                             XII
Big-boned man young and of my dream
Struggles to get the live bird out of his throat.
I am he am I?        Dreaming?
I am the bird am I?        I am the throat?
A bird with a curved beak.
It could slit anything, the throat-bird.
Drawn up slowly.        The curved blades, not large.
Bird emerges        wet        being born
Begins to sing.
                             XIII
My night awake
staring at the broad rough jewel
the copper roof across the way
thinking of the poet
yet unborn in this dark
who will be the throat of these hours.
No.        Of those hours.
Who will speak these days,
if not I,
if not you?
~~~
O my Love sent me a lusty list,
Did not compare me to a summer's day
Wrote not the beauty of mine eyes
But catalogued in a pretty detailed
And comprehensive way the way(s)
In which he was better than me.
"More capable of extra- and inter-
Polation. More well-traveled -rounded multi-
Lingual! More practiced in so many matters
More: physical, artistic, musical,
Politic(al) academic (I dare say!) social
(In many ways!) and (ditto!) sexual!”
And yet these mores undid but his own plea(s)(e)
And left, none-the-less, the Greater Moor of me.
 
~~~
This isn’t a great poem.
I’m not writing this to write a great poem.
I am writing this because I am one person.
I am only one.
I have a face and a front of my face.
I have two shoulders and two hips.
I’m living.
I live.
So what can I do with my face if it can’t see that person’s face?
What do I tell my eyes to see?
How do I let them know that when they see that face it is that person’s wish that they not know it?
How do I tell them we have to go back into the world where no one knows us and we don’t know anyone?
How do I tell them to stay there?
There is nothing for them to see.
How do I tell my hands they will never touch that person’s hands?
How do I tell my ears that when that person says my name it is only a word?
How do I tell my lips to make that person’s name another word so I can say it?
How do I tell my neck that person cannot see it?
How do I tell my hair that person cannot pull it?
It is my hair.
It is my head.
How do I tell my teeth they will never strike that person’s teeth?
How do I tell my thighs it does not matter what they do?
They are the tops of my legs.
They will fall apart.
How do I tell my back it must never wait for that person?
That person will not hold me.
That person does not know where I am, does not think of me.
Does not know I have exhausted every argument against him.
That person does not know I no longer love freedom.
That person does not know what it means when I ask for forgiveness.
That person does not know I beg the world to let me change.
That person cannot see my face.
Knows a woman with my name and she is a woman.
Does not know the word I hide behind my words.
Does not know this face.
Does not know this is my face.
Says my name and looks at this person.
How do I tell my feet to stand here?
How do I tell my eyes to see?
How do I tell the voice under my voice to keep on speaking?
How do I tell my mouth to speak?
~~~
You follow close behind me, for a thousand miles responsive to my movements. I signal, you signal back. We will meet at the next exit. You blow kisses, which I return. You mouth "I love you," a message for my rearview mirror. We do a slow tango as we change lanes in tandem, gracefully, as though music were guiding us. It is tighter than bodies locked in heat, this caring, this ardent watching.
~~~
Two of themwith chests like blond silkcornsilk hairstalled in trafficin the awful heatthey smiledwere they messengersdelivering through the open windowpromises or lies or invitations?Boys are everywhere
at noon they glide
between parched cars
bare broad shoulders
color of chestnut colts
~~~
Loving you less than life, a little less
Than bitter-sweet upon a broken wall
Or brush-wood smoke in autumn, I confess
I cannot swear I love you not at all.
For there is that about you in this light—
A yellow darkness, sinister of rain—
Which sturdily recalls my stubborn sight
To dwell on you, and dwell on you again.
And I am made aware of many a week
I shall consume, remembering in what way
Your brown hair grows about your brow and cheek
And what divine absurdities you say:
Till all the world, and I, and surely you,
Will know I love you, whether or not I do.
 
~~~
It's all foreplay, really-this walk
through the French Quarter exploring souvenir shops,
each of them carefully deranged, as if dust were to settle
only at perfect intervals. Yes to the vetiver fan
that smells sweeter than sandalwood or cedar.
No to the mammy doll dinner bells.
No to the mammy dolls whose sewn smiles are as fixed
as the lives of too many poor Black women here:
motherhood at twelve, drugged, abandoned by fifteen,
dead by twenty (suicide, murder) so easily in Desire.
And yet, their voices sweeten the snaking air,
providing the transvestites their proper Muses,
all of whom have streets named for them in the Garden District.
A soft heat settles on Terpsichore,
just inside the gay bar where the owner's pink flamingos
complement silly songs on the rescued Rockola.
Who can dance to that Lorne Greene ballad, "Ringo"?
Dixie beer is the beer of choice; marijuana the cheapest drug.
Relaxation is key, since it's all a matter of waiting
for the right body to stumble toward you.
Lust perfumes parties in the projects, barstool chatter at the Hyatt,
lazy kissing on the median strip stretching down Tchoupitoulas.
If Professor Longhair were alive, he'd teach a lesson
in seamless motion: the perfect slide of a man's hand down a
              woman's back;
a lesson you learned long ago before you met me. We are making love
as we did before in Austin and Manhattan.
But in this room on this costly bed our lovemaking
starts out the slowest grind, then, like this city's weather,
goes from hot to hotter, from moist to rainstorm wet.
You're tall, A., and where there should be tribal markings
there are scars-football, basketball, mid-sixties grind parties
where something always got out of hand. There's the perfect
amen. You're your own gospel.
And you bring good news to me-the way you enter me
Like grace, the way you say my name, a psalm.
No. That's not it. It's the engineer in you that
gets me. Your search for the secret line that goes
straight to the center of the earth. Deeper and deeper
you go until there's no earth left in me. And we
hum and moan a song as old as our selves gone back.
There are too many souvenirs in your eyes.
Gifts given too often, too hastily, never opened.
Outside a city sprawls its heat, seeks out every pore,
licks every moment of sweat as we shiver in this chilly room
taking each other's measure. We say good-bye again and again.
As if every kiss, every touch we make will shadow
All our celebrations.
And they do.
~~~
peach of a grape                           in his fingertips                                                        like holding home            he noses its muskTaste, he says                         and parts my lips with a globe and                                                                                    a thumb I lick                                                        I bite the thick skin                           His Arkansas aches                                                                      sweet                                                                                                 on my tongue                           His hand vines my chin my throatMy face flames                                To the lady on the bus                                                           he brags                                                                           Her blush comes from my touch.
~~~
  If I had known  Two years ago how drear this life should be,  And crowd upon itself allstrangely sad,  Mayhap another song would burst from out my lips,  Overflowing with the happiness of future hopes;  Mayhap another throb than that of joy.  Have stirred my soul into its inmost depths,                    If I had known.  If I had known,  Two years ago the impotence of love,  The vainness of a kiss, how barren a caress,  Mayhap my soul to higher things have soarn,  Nor clung to earthly loves and tender dreams,  But ever up aloft into the blue empyrean,  And there to master all the world of mind,                    If I had known.
~~~
‘The myrtle bush grew shadyDown by the ford.’‘Is it even so?’ said my lady.‘Even so!’ said my lord.‘The leaves are set too thick togetherFor the point of a sword.‘The arras in your room hangs close,No light between!You wedded one of those that see unseen.’‘Is it even so?’ said the King’s Majesty.‘Even so!’ said the Queen.
~~~
when i look at my life
i feel like bursting into tears
marriage
and mental illness
vintage washed
michael jackson graphic
spiritual disco grieving ritual
sell your body
to your horse-eyed past
little fictions
somebody got to sing
and somebody
got to play the squaw
last time i saw him
last time i saw my honey
buried your dead
lack of afro
exit wounds
cut off whole limbs
of generational desire
the death of cleopatra
hell or high water
get some fucking
love in your life girl
ghost chant
you’ve got to die
if you want to live
amidst and against 
the things we are 
rubbed into the cloth
wrapped around their faces
now white men
are black men too
the ways
we can’t say no
i call you queen
not as a term of endearment
but as a reminder
our histories meet
on the inside
we all be black moses
slave for the river
same river twice
sometimes
have to emphasize
the brown part
hey there beautiful brown girl
we don't usually change
until things are so painful
that we must
 
~~~
It would never be possible for a stone, no more than for an airplane, to elevate itself toward the sun in jubilation.                                                       — Martin Heidegger



The dragonflies again; the last time seeing them skim the river close                                    to forgotten — their singing, their shimmer — now remembered, becoming so much flame;             as tongues over the heads of the chosen in the child’s picture book of Christ I learned by heart, descent and weight of after the fact, the gift                              the fork between hope and vanity, the river that eatsitself  turned mirror broken into                                                            light; the corpse between the beloved’s good word and the beloved                               who having spoken was ever spokeninto being, lies, unspeaking, and as with any heaviness that lowersthen hovers, remains                               inconceivable; so the letter given in stone, perfection in fire;love; all               love’s failures; the winged animaldrops to the earth and is there buried in a hole where it digs in the grit like the blade                                             we left in the riverbed, adrift and cry-shaped in the memory, both that dim and that loud; though                                                          no accosting why itseems that way, everything ghost of itself or everything made                                                   of mythic proportion, the walkersinking from the face of the waters, the dragon Ibecome when I talk to myself, what a belief                                                                             is, terrifyingand relentless; I’ve never been able to tell the difference;                                              the brute and the apparitionin reflection speak at once — the rock and the rock’s light — so that now the insect thrums                                                       and it is surelya kind of tenderness, an ODing in secret, turning into while turningfrom the soul the animal raised                                                        and devoured in dream; imagine, the child’s wished-for surface gives and ripples up                                                                                            to mouththe perfect imprint, saying “aircraft” and there are aircraft, amen,the walker is surrounded by flight on all sides;                                                                                     the walker walks without wings; see,the recollection is flawless, turning wings of  jewels; the recollection is absolute, swallows whole;                                                                                  echoes;and the dragon feasts; and the dragon flies again;
~~~
Orange gleams athwart a crimson soulLambent flames; purple passion lurksIn your dusk eyes.Red mouth; flower soft,Your soul leaps up—and flashesStar-like, white, flame-hot.Curving arms, encircling a world of love,You! Stirring the depths of passionate desire!
~~~
Lash everything irredeemable to the ficus
with muscle. Use the flexor digitorum brevis
from the arch of my right foot.
This is how what’s grounded gets hitched
to the rooted, everything cramped
into place and contemplative. Tight
striations might as well be bindings
to Bodhi as body. Why not dump this tired mind
at the foot of a tree, aerial roots
less caustic than an unanswered calling — 
or perhaps this is it, to sit, to ponder, to ask:
what violated cunt, what unhappy gasp,
what sad spat, and toppling building
left us blooming untoward?
Who puts flowers on the inside of a fig
except the injured or the bereft?
The ones who hankered hard
and failed to do anything but live
lush and fallible? What regret is: bark
or bitch. The world succumbs to beauty
even now, in the throes. The sky is dark
and hidden behind branches, cephalic
veins clotted with grief. Hush now,
finally. All the face can do is flush, sympathetic
nervous system, visible horror of wounded
and wounding. All inflorescence remains safe
inside that place the mind opens up pear-­shaped
and vast: the body of every lover is unattached
to hurt or hope, falls in its own field of daffodils,
to curl fetal with singular prowess or glut.
~~~
You saved me, you should remember me.
The spring of the year; young men buying tickets for the ferryboats.
Laughter, because the air is full of apple blossoms.
When I woke up, I realized I was capable of the same feeling.
I remember sounds like that from my childhood,   
laughter for no cause, simply because the world is beautiful,
something like that.
Lugano. Tables under the apple trees.
Deckhands raising and lowering the colored flags.
And by the lake’s edge, a young man throws his hat into the water;
perhaps his sweetheart has accepted him.
Crucial
sounds or gestures like
a track laid down before the larger themes
and then unused, buried.
Islands in the distance. My mother   
holding out a plate of little cakes—
as far as I remember, changed
in no detail, the moment
vivid, intact, having never been
exposed to light, so that I woke elated, at my age   
hungry for life, utterly confident—
By the tables, patches of new grass, the pale green   
pieced into the dark existing ground.
Surely spring has been returned to me, this time   
not as a lover but a messenger of death, yet   
it is still spring, it is still meant tenderly.
~~~
  
We have orgies at home.
Tonight, it’s The Book of Mormon. 
~~~
Come to me in the silence of the night;
   Come in the speaking silence of a dream;
Come with soft rounded cheeks and eyes as bright
   As sunlight on a stream;
      Come back in tears,
O memory, hope, love of finished years.
Oh dream how sweet, too sweet, too bitter sweet,
   Whose wakening should have been in Paradise,
Where souls brimfull of love abide and meet;
   Where thirsting longing eyes
      Watch the slow door
That opening, letting in, lets out no more.
Yet come to me in dreams, that I may live
   My very life again tho’ cold in death:
Come back to me in dreams, that I may give
   Pulse for pulse, breath for breath:
      Speak low, lean low,
As long ago, my love, how long ago.
 
~~~
Could you come back to me, Douglas, Douglas,In the old likeness that I knew,I would be so faithful, so loving, Douglas,Douglas, Douglas, tender and true.Never a scornful word should grieve ye,I’d smile on ye sweet as the angels do,—Sweet as your smile on me shone ever,Douglas, Douglas, tender and true.Oh, to call back the days that are not!My eyes were blinded, your words were few;Do you know the truth now up in heaven,Douglas, Douglas, tender and true?I never was worthy of you, Douglas;Not half worthy the like of you:Now all men beside seem to me like shadows—I love you, Douglas, tender and true.Stretch out your hand to me, Douglas, Douglas,Drop forgiveness from heaven like dew;As I lay my heart on your dead heart, Douglas,Douglas, Douglas, tender and true.
~~~
O You,Who came upon me onceStretched under apple-trees just after bathing,Why did you not strangle me before speakingRather than fill me with the wild white honey of your wordsAnd then leave me to the mercy Of the forest bees.
~~~
Kissing the bankteller outside his stairs
In Brighton, MA I cannot lie. I felt the hope
That we once felt, if only for an instant
O the lovely bankteller, like a moose he
Rode my spirit quite outside my clothes
And chrysanthemums sprouted I assure you
Out my nipples when he kissed them.
And the pureness of not knowing him at all
Was really what we all feel when we enter this earth.
There is a newness to the best things that cannot
Be excelled and old things like old love die and rot.
There are old ideas in the world that should be forgotten
There are old ideas and old phrases that should at least
Be recycled for others
There are old plans now that should be new.
There are old thoughts in your head, my reader, and let them die.
Follow me, I am the crusader of the new
My spirit is a plastic rod that channels all our births.
And in the mouths of the little beasts, we shall find the great
Ocean that spits up black bugs all glittering on its shores.
You know there is an anthem to the ages.
There is an anthem of the ages.
This is that anthem
This is that anthem
~~~
because I go
          like the professed
                 sinner repentant
to the altar
of your baptismal flame
         I am saved
despite your
                        sculptor-love
whose whimsy kneads
                                             and molds
                                             and fires
then breaks
the free-form
of my fasting body
                                             to make
                                             me whole
yet thankful
I accept
                these carnal gifts
                of you
                              Eros
and wear them
as I would
flawless jewels
               (how can you
                know that I
                have bled
                the way
                and back
                biting the dust
                to wear
                your name?)
. . . the wound lies
                                                not
in your infliction
         but in my
                 expectations . . .
~~~
Just when he thought to loom the backyard for bud &
Just when he came to admire, or thought to dote over
Already he rues stick-thin arms, whose petals brave the late
Whose middles freeze; we’ve gone without
All ramose till now, empty skirts anxious to round back for
It’s the fourth year lips have gone without any such
Already hips full of leaves and none
Else, years by last, the lone — it splat behind
My back, it came to ache as the rake clawed at
We’ve gone into partial burn, without even
No matter for bloom, the seasons no longer allow
The trouble with doting over blossoms is
In a swollen tub of ruth, wanting nothing but his
~~~
A Poet am I neither born nor bred,But to a witty poet married:Whose brain is fresh and pleasant as the Spring,Where Fancies grow and where the Muses sing. There oft I lean my head, and listening, hark,To catch his words and all his fancies mark:And from that garden show of beauties takeWhereof a posy I in verse may make. Thus I, that have no gardens of my own,There gather flowers that are newly blown.
~~~
Today there has been so much talk of things exploding
into other things, so much that we all become curious, that we
all run outside into the hot streets
and hug. Romance is a grotto of eager stones
anticipating light, or a girl whose teeth
you can always see. With more sparkle and pop
is the only way to live. Your confetti tongue explodes
into acid jazz. Small typewriters
that other people keep in their eyes
click away at all our farewell parties. It is hard
to pack for the rest of your life. Someone is always
eating cold cucumber noodles. Someone will drop by later
to help dismantle some furniture. A lot can go wrong
if you sleep or think, but the trees go on waving
their broken little hands.
~~~
I read a Korean poem
with the line “Today you are the youngest
you will ever be.” Today I am the oldest
I have been. Today we drink
buckwheat tea. Today I have heat
in my apartment. Today I think
about the word chada in Korean.
It means cold. It means to be filled with. 
It means to kick. To wear. Today we’re worn.
Today you wear the cold. Your chilled skin.
My heart knocks on my skin. Someone said
winter has broken his windows. The heat inside
and the cold outside sent lightning across glass.
Today my heart wears you like curtains. Today
it fills with you. The window in my room
is full of leaves ready to fall. Chada, you say. It’s tea. 
We drink. It is cold outside.
 
~~~
I shall go back again to the bleak shore
And build a little shanty on the sand,
In such a way that the extremest band
Of brittle seaweed will escape my door
But by a yard or two; and nevermore
Shall I return to take you by the hand;
I shall be gone to what I understand,
And happier than I ever was before.
The love that stood a moment in your eyes,
The words that lay a moment on your tongue,
Are one with all that in a moment dies,
A little under-said and over-sung.
But I shall find the sullen rocks and skies
Unchanged from what they were when I was young.
~~~
              The grasses are light brown
              and the ocean comes in
              long shimmering lines
              under the fleet from last night
              which dozes now in the early morning
Here and there horses graze
              on somebody’s acreage
                               Strangely, it was not my desire
that bade me speak in church to be released
         but memory of the way it used to be in
careless and exotic play
               when characters were promises
      then recognitions.  The world of transformation
is real and not real but trusting.
                            Enough of these lessons?  I mean
didactic phrases to take you in and out of
love’s mysterious bonds?
                      Well I myself am not myself
           and which power of survival I speak
for is not made of houses.
          It is inner luxury, of golden figures
that breathe like mountains do
            and whose skin is made dusky by stars.
~~~
In the road, a dog. Days dead, that dog. Liliana was walking beside me awhile (I am sure) and I was almost not crying but then found what I was looking for. She heaved it for me—all of it, the stench, the weight—in her thin arms until it was too much. Tired, she dragged the thing by its wasted paws all the way home. Her dress was stained. This is how I learned about love. She did not mind at all the silent, steady distance I placed between us.
~~~
INo riches from his scanty store
 My lover could impart;He gave a boon I valued more —
 He gave me all his heart!
                IIHis soul sincere, his generous worth,
 Might well this bosom move;And when I asked for bliss on earth,
 I only meant his love.
                IIIBut now for me, in search of gain
 From shore to shore he flies;Why wander riches to obtain,
 When love is all I prize?
                IVThe frugal meal, the lowly cot
 If blest my love with thee!That simple fare, that humble lot,
 Were more than wealth to me.
                VWhile he the dangerous ocean braves,
 My tears but vainly flow:Is pity in the faithless waves
 To which I pour my woe?
                VIThe night is dark, the waters deep,
 Yet soft the billows roll;Alas! at every breeze I weep —
 The storm is in my soul.
~~~
I forgot how lush and electrified
it was with you. The shaggy
fragrant zaps continually passing
back and forth, my fingertip
to your clavicle, or your wrist
rubbing mine to share gardenia
oil. We so purred like dragonflies
we kept the mosquitoes away
and the conversation was heavy,
mother-lacerated childhoods
and the sad way we'd both
been both ignored and touched
badly. Knowing that being
fierce and proud and out and
loud was just a bright new way
to be needy. Please listen to me, oh
what a buzz! you're the only one I can tell. Even with no secret,
I could come close to your ear
with my mouth and that was
ecstasy, too. We barely touched
each other, we didn't have to
speak. The love we made leapt
to life like a cat in the space
between us (if there ever was 
space between us), and looked
back at us through fog. Sure,
this was San Francisco, it was
often hard to see. But fog always
burned off, too, so we watched
this creature to see if it knew
what it was doing. It didn't.
~~~
I am trying to remember the lyrics of old songs
                                                            I’ve forgotten, mostly
I am trying to remember one-hit wonders, hymns,
                                              and musicals like West Side Story.
Singing over and over what I can recall, I hum remnants on
                                                             buses and in the car.
 
I am so often alone these days with echoes of these old songs
                                                          and my ghosted lovers.
I am so often alone that I can almost hear it, can almost feel
                                                        the half-touch of others,
can almost taste the licked clean spine of the melody I’ve lost.
 
I remember the records rubbed with static and the needle
                                                                     gathering dust.
I remember the taste of a mouth so sudden and still cold from
                                                                         wintry gusts.
It seemed incredible then — a favorite song, a love found.
                                                                It wasn't, after all.
 
Days later, while vacuuming, the lyrics come without thinking.
Days later, I think I see my old lover in a café but don’t,
                                                                        how pleasing
it was to think it was him, to finally sing that song.
 
This is the way of all amplitude: we need the brightness
                                                                         to die some.
This is the way of love and music: it plays like a god and
                                                                       then is done.
Do I feel better remembering, knowing for certain
                                                                       what’s gone?
~~~
Love Song for the Newly Divorced



One day, you will awake from your covering and that heart of yours will be totally mended, and there will be no more burning within. The owl, calling in the setting of the sunand the deer path, all erased. And there will be no more need for love or lovers or fears of losing lovers and there will be no more burning timbers with which to light a new fire, and there will be no more husbands or people related to husbands, and there will be no more tears or reason to shed your tears. You will be as mended as the bridge the working crew has just reopened. The thick air will be vanquished with the tide and the river that was corrupted by lies will be cleansed and totally free. And the rooster will call in the setting sun and the sun will beckon homeward, hiding behind your one tree that was not felled.