
~~~
Hour in which I consider hydrangea, a salt or sand plant, varietal, the question of varietals, the diet of every mother I know, 5 pounds feels like 20, I have lost … I have lost, yes, a sense of my own possible beauty, grown external, I externalize beauty. Beauty occurs on the surface of plants; the sun darkens the skin of my child, he is so small, he is beautiful (I can see; it is obvious) and everything about him is beautiful. His hand swells from the bite [spread?] of some insect[’s] venom because he is small. He appears to feel nothing. He smashes his skull against the floor. He screams. I hold him in my lap on the kitchen floor in front of an open freezer, pressing a pack of frozen clay against his forehead. He likes the cold. I see; it is so obvious. Hydrangea. When I move, when I walk pushing my child’s stroller (it is both walking and pushing or hauling, sometimes, also, lifting; it is having another body, an adjunct body composed of errand and weight and tenderness and no small amount of power), I imagine I can feel this small amount of weight, this 5 pounds like 20, interfering with the twitch of every muscle in my body. As an object, a mother is confusing, a middle-aged mother with little spare flesh, I feel every inch of major muscle pulling against gravity and against the weight of my child, now sleeping. This is the hour for thinking hydrangea. Let no man look at me. I stop to brush the drowsy child’s little eye. His face. He barely considers his mother. I am all around him. Why should he consider what is all around him? Perhaps what is missing is a subtle power of differentiation. I am in, therefore, a time of mass apprehensions.
~~~
Rotten, he says, motherly
how could you miss that
Like a ragamuffin with no eyes
his body has a dark spot
Like doing laundry all day long
he is being nowhere
Cottage cheese runs out his mouth
Another one and another one
that doll can crawl
his insides like an awning
Motherly if mother
mother as if spread
If I could break
the hymen of his ear with 
I can't stand you
I won't say a thing and I won't notice
god you are
the softest
kind of jerk
and yesterday is gone
and I had nothing to do with it
~~~
Department of Trance
Department of Dream of Levitation
Department of White Fathom
Department of Winding
Sometimes my son orders me lie down
I like when he orders me lie down          close your eyes
Department of Paper Laid Gentry
Department of Sound of Sheets of Paper
                                                                           he covers me with
then sings
I like best the smallest sounds he makes then
Department of This Won’t Sting
Am I slipping away
Department of Violet Static
as if he were a distant station
Department of Satellite
My child says you sleep
Department of Infinitely Flexible Web
and covers my face with blankness
Department of Tap-Tapping the Vein
Department of Eyelash
I can’t speak
                           or even blink
                                                      or the page laid over my face will fall
Department of Clear Tape in Whorls and Double Helixes on the Wall
He says Mama don’t look 
Department of You Won’t Feel a Thing
I cannot behold
Department of Pinprick
He will not behold
Department of Veils and Chimes
of Lungs Afloat in Ether
 
I like this best
Department of Spider Vein
when I am most like dead
and being with him then, Department of Notes
Struck from Thin Glasses Successively at Random
I must explain to my child that sleep
                                                                    is not the same as dead
Department of Borderlessness
so that he may not be afraid of
Department of Fingertips Lightly on Eyelids
so I can lie and listen
not holding not carrying not working
Department of Becalmed             faint sound of him
 
                                                                                                 I am gone
 
His song is the door back to the room
 
I am composed of the notes
 
~~~
When I was
nearly six my
father 
opened his magic
doctor bag: 
two
tongue depressors fastened by 
a rubber
band; 
one flick
of his hairy wrist 
and lo!
we invented 
flight.
~~~
Looks to me like you’ve been disinherited, mute-chanting     while sirens scatter the will into a dull blade that can be attached to the muzzle of a rifle like a shadow     or   braid joke.    Stray dreadlock at the bus stop/ black stranded on blue/ and grape flavored bayonet that’s the word, French, daisy-hued lemon enunciation of when. I heard you were leaving this country     and     you tried   holding Rockefeller to daddy’s     promise     in the corridor of  being reasonable     and that he who could not sing should be made to sing     and the crow   pecking at synthetic kinky reggae would stow ’way home     If we   start thinking about the things   that keep us   in   a   place     we know we shouldn’t be in      and as the gates swing   open   jump rope like boxers training in velour short-shorts   and spitfire   just to keep brides in the jungle     sequestered /  the sore lavender nipples of the dairy cows add a rude dimension to the tasting menu   but that’s   what feeds you this sour mold juice, like the tiny yelling hands that piece together these machines   american dolls   and   darn that     charming cardigan made in Stanley Cowell’s   incantatory   shroud of a   winter power outage  ,  every shimmering object settles   in cold blood but I will not be interrupted of it .    I’m sending you two black babies     the greeting card reads     the wood of the reed splits     like the chief’s prophecy/ mask ,     Ma     remembers     the one that sold   her first was   it her father     what is   a   father   bath on   netted   lots .  of stray turtle doves   in this tribe,   ruler and thundering     Bula gnawing on the missing leg     of a queen’s   stool, hers, m aa fa s nursing trumpet was   she her father     I will not be interrupted   even to be my own father   watching me   dance   and earn him   a village .  even by Black Christ of the Tropics   begging to learn his name   in silver verses     I will not be interrupted     I     will   not   be interrupted
~~~
On the mudroad of plodding American bodies,
         my son wove like an antelope from stall   
to stall and want to want. I no’ed it all: the wind-up
         killer robot and winged alien; knives   
hierarchical in a glass case; the blow-up vinyl wolf
         bobbing from a pilgrim’s staff.
Lured as I was by the bar-b-que’s black smoke,
         I got in line. A hog carcass,
blistered pink on a spit, made its agonized slow roll,   
         a metaphor, I thought, for anyone
ahead of me—the pasty-faced and broad. I half-longed   
         for the titanium blade I’d just seen
curved like a falcon’s claw. Some truth wanted cutting   
         in my neighbors’ impermanent flesh.
Or so my poisoned soul announced, as if scorn   
         for the body politic
weren’t some outward form of inner scorn,
         as if I were fit judge.
Lucky my son found the bumper cars. Once I’d hoped   
         only to stand tall enough
to drive my own. Now when the master switch got thrown   
         and sparks skittered overhead
in a lightning web, I felt like Frankenstein or some   
         newly powered monster.
Plus the floor was glossy as ice. Even rammed head-on,
         the rubber bumper bounced you off unhurt
and into other folks who didn’t mind the jolt, whose faces
         all broke smiles, in fact,
till the perfect figure-eight I’d started out to execute
         became itself an interruption. One face   
after another wheeled shining at me from the dark,
         each bearing the weight of a whole self.   
What pure vessels we are, I thought, once our skulls
         shut up their nasty talk.
We drove home past corn at full tassel, colossal silos,   
         a windmill sentinel. Summer was starting.
My son’s body slumped like a grain sack against mine.   
         My chest was all thunder.
On the purple sky in rear view, fireworks unpacked—silver   
         chrysanthemum, another in fuchsia,
then plum. Each staccato boom shook the night. My son
         jerked in his sleep. I prayed hard to keep   
the frail peace we hurtled through, to want no more
         than what we had. The road
rushed under us. Our lush planet heaved toward day.   
         Inside my hand’s flesh,
anybody’s skeleton gripped the wheel.
~~~
The leaves talked in the twilight, dear;
   Hearken the tale they told:
How in some far-off place and year,
   Before the world grew old,
I was a dreaming forest tree,
   You were a wild, sweet bird
Who sheltered at the heart of me
   Because the north wind stirred;
How, when the chiding gale was still,
   When peace fell soft on fear,
You stayed one golden hour to fill
   My dream with singing, dear.
To-night the self-same songs are sung
   The first green forest heard;
My heart and the gray world grow young—
   To shelter you, my bird.
~~~
O
melting rainbow that embrace this roof
O
persistent covenant
hangs around
giving us nothing, leaves its muck in the water
expects us to be knocked out by its fine colors
weren’t you nothing too, weren’t you
sea bottom
crunched down into fuel
and when that eggshell roof busts through
mama’s gonna buy you
a rainbow ride for free
an illumination, an inflammation
hyperion flame headdress
dream pins in the fuel
balloons of Koolaid burst down to cool
the sticky baby’s head
plus a credit card a glock a new bible
a princess dress
a mermaid princess dress
so you’ll be twice submerged
or an erased Indian princess
pajama set now go to sleep
~~~
As if because you lay(deeply embarrassing) inside
my body, I could (inconceivable)
follow your swift thoughts into their blue   
immersion even now,
stilettoes flickering, or schools of fish
maneuvering, first clear and then occluded,
though now and then a piercing gleam cuts through;
as if the snow reflections that glaze   
the winter afternoon to porcelain
could penetrate the secrets of a skull
that happens to have lodged (improbable)
inside me once. Your liberation
twelve years ago today is the occasion   
you and your friends are celebrating now   
behind a door that’s firmly shut.
The fantasy you’ve lately been devouring   
features an evil mage with hourglass eyes.   
Last week, when you were furious at me
(I must have thrown some precious thing away),   
you swiftly slipped into your parents’ room   
and turned the bedside clock an hour ahead.   
Discovered as the culprit, wickedly
you smiled. You knew time was my enemy.
~~~
My bonsai teacher says to quit doing it like a girl.
I’m pruning the root-ball of a Podocarpus,
or Buddhist pine, trained semicascade.
The first time Dad fell,
the femur broke in eleven places
due to his artificial knee (titanium and steel).
A rod screwed to the bones in thirteen places
didn’t work, and the graft stayed weak.
For two years he fought his wheelchair
into near submission. The grand finale
was him riding it down two flights of stairs
without tipping over or falling out.
The nurses loved him.
The last time I called tech help
I got George in Salt Lake, at work
at six in the morning their time.
He was very helpful.
I offered to write a note for his file,
but he said, It’s OK, Chase.
Your compliment is enough.
~~~
This timeless blood was here before begat.     Infinity runs in your veins—        Not mine, nor yours,             Nor Eve’s, not Adam’s—                  Gat of God,                       And spinning like taffy Godwards back again.Sapped through the centuries to us—     Grafting a limb there for the Jesse tree—        Remultiplied infinitely,             From heart to heart tick-pulsed,                  Ill clad, ill fed, ill fit—                       Here, child, do what you can with it.Originally appeared in the July 1968 issue of Poetry magazine.
~~~
DANCE little baby, dance up high,Never mind baby, mother is by ;Crow and caper, caper and crow,There little baby, there you go ;Up to the ceiling, down to the ground,Backwards and forwards, round and round ;Dance little baby, and mother shall sing,With the merry coral, ding, ding, ding.
~~~
This is how it is with me:
so strong, I want to draw the egg
from your womb and nourish it in my own.
I want to mother your child made only
of us, of me, you: no borrowed seed
from any man. I want to re-fashion
the matrix of creation, make a human being
from the human love that passes between
our bodies. Sweetheart, this is how it is:
when you emerge from the bedroom
in a clean cotton shirt, sleeves pushed back
over forearms, scented with cologne
from an amber bottle—I want to open
my heart, the brightest aching slit
of my soul, receive your pearl.
I watch your hands, wait for the sign
that means you’ll touch me,
open me, fill me; wait for that moment
when your desire leaps inside me.
~~~
My daddy understood
the richness of color and
shunned my oldest sister’s
whitewashed birth.Who the white child belong to?
He asked in the delivery ward
shaming himself as the source.
Shadism colored my siblings’ perception.
An ideal hierarchy with light skin the pinnacle
after the paper bag test proved me cocoa dark
and of less value.
Burned biscuit defined what I could not
erase. When they tired of sidewalk chalk
and strike ’em out
their feigned indignation
made my smile give and give
unsuccessfully, reaching eyes
where ducts emptied silently.
Turned my cheek
on juvenile acceptance
and sibling rivalry
reminding myself thatAfter all, I’m the real thing
and it comforted me.
~~~
... if thou shouldst not be glad,
I would divorce me from thy mother’s tomb,
Sepulch’ring an adult’ress.
— William Shakespeare, King Lear



He faked my death,
set up this ranch
far from my three
daughters. Suburban
hellhole. With bracelet
on ankle, house-
arrest. At noon
the bully sun
shoulders a ripe
moon. In the dark
soaps reign. The anchors
will often flash
their glitterati
weddings. Not one
daughter has birthed
an heir. In vitro —
be damned. I hose
the lawn and count
the cars like fish
slipping their shiny
chrome along asphalt.
Which sparrow missed?
Cordelia —
my gutted heart.
~~~
Now here is a typical children’s story
that happens in gorgeous October
when the mothers are coming
in the afternoon, wearing brisk boots
and windy skirts to pick up
the little children from the day care center
Frost in the air
the maples golden and crimson
my son in a leaf pile in the playground dreaming
I am late, the playground is almost
empty, my husband will kill me
I gather my son to go home,
he forgets his sweater in the playground and I send him back
he dawdles, he is playing with leaves
in his mind, it is already a quarter
to six, will you come on I say
and hurry along the corridor, there are yellow and blue rocket
paintings, but I feel bad and ask what did you do today,
do you recognize this story, the way he stands and picks
his nose, move I say, do you want dinner or not
I’m going to make a nice dinner, fried chicken
I wheedle, so could you please walk a little
faster, okay, I walk a little faster and get upstairs
myself, pivot on boot-heel, nobody there,
he is putting something in his mouth, his sable eyelashes
downcast, and I am swooping down the stairwell screaming
         damn you
         that’s filthy
         I told you not before dinner
We are climbing the stairs
and I am crying, my son is not crying
I have shaken him, I have pried the sweet from his cheek
I have slapped his cheek like a woman slapping a carpet
with all my strength
         mothers are very strong
         he is too young to do anything about this
         will not remember he remembers it
The mind is a leaf pile where you can bury
anything, pain, the image of a woman
who wears a necklace of skulls, a screaming woman
you dig quickly and deposit the pulpy thing
you drop leaves on it and it stays there, that is the story
that is sticking in my mind as we push
the exit door, and run through the evening wind
to my car where I jerk the gearshift and pick
up a little speed, going along
this neat suburban avenue full of maples
the mark of my hand a blush on my son’s cheek.
~~~
Here where the rooms are dryly stillWho is this dustily asleepWhile juicy children run the field?Where is her ever deepening wellWhose buckets to a fullness dipFor needs compassion must fulfill?Like freshets they themselves may yieldA little to the turned up cup,But death is in the long dry spell.Run children, run, the light grows dull,And she who keeps the well must sleep,And rain is unpredictable.December 1951
~~~
“I fucked up bad”: Justin cracks his neck,talking to nobody. Fifteen responsible children,final semester college seniors, bloodshot,collars undone, gorgeously exhausted, return from Wall Street interviews in attitudes of surrender on the Dinky—the one-car commuter train connecting Princeton to the New York line. Panic-sweat sheens their faces. Justin hasn’t seen me yet. “Something’s fucked with my tie.” He’s right. I see his future, the weight he’ll gain first in his face, then gut and ass, the look of bad luck he’ll haunt his bad jobs with. He tears off the tie. Elephants on it. Fatigue, swollen ankles, the midwife said. The worst discomforts of pregnancy. I wrote those down. But she’s wrong: self-pity. Strange dreams, she said. No dreams. Discarded newspapers—business section, money, real estate, auto—sift apart to quartos and folios underfoot. “Shut up, Justin,” says the girl across from him. I hardly recognize Brianna in her interview hair. She scratches her face, fingers trembling from the day’s aftershocks. “I wanted,” she counts on her fingers, performing the sitcom of her tragedy, “Tribeca loft, expense account, designer clothes so haute they don’t look it, my very own Tesla, summer home in the Hamptons I’m too busy to use.”“You wanted money,” says Justin.Brianna: “It went down with the towers.”I spent my lopsided day lifting my bellyback towards center, interviewing for adjunct jobs. There’s a half-moon in half-clouds up over the tracks. Justin spreads over three seats, texts with his thumbs, talks: “The Lehman Brothers guy asks me, Did you ever sell anything? Sell me a bottle of water. I’m like fu-uck. To say something I say ‘Why do you like water?’ He says...” Justin fixes a diamond stud back in his ear. “They’ll let me know.” Fifteen responsible childrensigh in disappointed relief. Somebody they knowdidn’t get the job they didn’t get. I sleep. Wake.Beautiful clothes spread bodiless before me!Tailored black suits and skirts, silk ties,ephemera of sheer and filmy stockings deflated over seat backs. Brianna looks around,no conductor coming, squats to peel off, in one motion, skirt, hose, underpants, step butt-naked into soft chino shorts I’ll neverbe able to afford. “Nervous crotch sweat,” she says.I keep trying to look not-quite-40in a different way than I’m not-quite-40.The woman interviewer looked at my belly.“As a new mother would you have time to be literary mama to your students?” So I could suewhen they don’t hire me for the job I don’t want.Justin looks up from his iPhone: “Soon-Jigot three offers. Fuck.” He flips the curlhis mother’s fingers crimped, first day of pre-Kinto his four-year-old forelock. “He’s guessing he’ll go with Goldman Sachs.” Brianna grabs her neck in living garrote. She high-fives anybody she can reach in gloomy delight. She gobblessnack-pack popcorn, licks her fingers; bits dropyellow from her lips. “My mom will go crazyDeutsche Bank didn’t offer.” She sees me.“I didn’t realize that was you with your hair up.Look, Just.” She high-fives me. “It’s Professor.”Is Brianna crying? “Don’t call me Professor,” I say, dozens of times a semester. “I’m a writer, not a teacher.” Justin grabs a Norton Anthology out of his five-hundred-dollar briefcase. “Fuck.What are we supposed to read for tomorrow?”“Prufrock, dummy,” Brianna says. “You’re a good professor.” She condescends through tears. “Poor baby,” mocks Justin, slumping so low in the seat I only see his shoe soles on the arm rest. The train swooshes through suburban tracts. The moon gets smaller. Brianna arrives mornings to workshop in a fake hurry and the sweats she slept in, probably rolls backin bed after. She hands out slight, surprising poems,apologizes, sips cardboard-container coffee in a recyclable sleeve, turns her BlackBerry to vibrate.It moans like indigestion through class.I hand her one of my self-pity tissues. My ankles are slim. Brianna hates her name. “So tacky.I’d be a Kelly if I were twenty years older.”I’d like to be able to hate her. I’m turning into my Favorite Teachers—so kind,so industrious, so interested and interesting.“Sorry I’m late with my portfolio,” she saysthrough sniffles. She dabs her lip. “I had to prepare for,”a breath, “interviews.” A few times a semesterI say “It’s only poetry.” Gumbleeds! nosebleeds!the midwife predicted, and it’s true, my Kleenexesare measled with blood, weird hairs, stretch marks,frequent catnaps, hip joints so loose you must take care
~~~
Whenever my father was left with nothing to do —
      waiting for someone to 'get ready',
or facing the gap between graduate seminars
      and dull after-suppers in his study
grading papers or writing a review —
      he played the piano.
I think of him packing his lifespan
      carefully, like a good leather briefcase,
each irritating chore wrapped in floating passages
      for the left hand and right hand
by Chopin or difficult Schumann;
      nothing inside it ever rattled loose.
Not rationalism, though you could cut your tongue
      on the blade of his reasonable logic.
Only at the piano did he become
      the bowed, reverent, wholly absorbed Romantic.
The theme of his heroic, unfinished piano sonata
      could have been Brahms.
Boredom, or what he disapproved of as
      'sitting around with your mouth open'
oddly pursued him. He had small stamina.
      Whenever he succumbed to bouts of winter bronchitis,
the house sank a little into its snowed-up garden,
      missing its musical swim-bladder.
None of this suggests how natural he was.
      For years I thought fathers played the piano
just as dogs barked and babies grew.
      We children ran in and out of the house,
taking for granted that the 'Trout' or E flat Major Impromptu
      would be rippling around us.
For him, I think, playing was solo flying, a bliss
      of removal, of being alone.
Not happily always; never an escape,
      for he was affectionate, and the household hum
he pretended to find trivial or ridiculous
      daily sustained him.
When he talked about music, it was never
      of the lachrimae rerum
that trembled from his drawn-out phrasing
      as raindrops phrase themselves along a wire;
no, he defended movable doh or explained the amazing
      physics of the octave.
We'd come in from school and find him
      cross-legged on the jungle of the floor,
guts from one of his Steinways strewn about him.
      He always got the pieces back in place.
I remember the yellow covers of Schirmer's Editions
      and the bound Peters Editions in the bookcase.
When he defected to the cello in later years
      Grandmother, in excrucio, mildly exclaimed,
'Wasn't it lovely when Steve liked to play the piano.'
      Now I'm the grandmother listening to Steve at the piano.
Lightly, in strains from Brahms-Haydn variations,
      his audible image returns to my humming ears.
~~~
For Marilyn who died in January



april 1 
found on our driveway
  like a feather dropped     by a crow
 

  8 of spades,        a playing    card /
 

       we played Crazy Eights, slapping        cards or holding them        as if they were birds that might fly        out of our hands 
decades ago, in our childhood
       like the translucent, whirling        image I imagine, prismatic and phosphorescent —         a murmuration of starlings swooping        and iridescent 
but it dissolved onto a gray wall, undecorated
       / glimpses of us wearing our        velvet Sunday best dresses, yours        usually crimson, mine blue
 

       we never had nice shoes. 
Now you have returned to water
 thanks to the Neptune Society spreading        your ashes over the Pacific
 
 
 april 2
 
Ceylon tea — that amber cup
            from Sri Lanka, popularly known here, before
            Americans became tea drinkers, as
                 Orange Pekoe;
                        our mother hated
                        so many things — 
                                              tea was
                                   rattlesnake venom to
                                                                     her
            I embraced it  ///
            What did you drink, Marilyn? I saw you only
with a Coke or a glass of wine in your hand?
Our mother whom you felt
damaged you / your life       spirals, the twisting iridescent birds
              fly at me now                       scintillating, spinning
                                     I blink
(Our mother drank many cups of coffee with cream a day.)
Our sad mother
                                   I blink
                                   and tell it to go back to our childhood
                                   of muddy little shoes from walking in
                                   the spider-filled orange groves.
There, the damaging must have Begun  / she
                                   loving me so much
                                                                      more
                                                                      than you.
I wish there had been more stories
like the one about the origin of her disliking tea
            at 17, she went to celebrate being made teacher
            of the one-room school she had attended and
            graduated from at her retiring teacher’s
            home, she was served for the first time — tea, she
            being from a German coffee-drinking family.
            Our mother hated it but politely choked it down.
            Would never again touch a drop of the
            poisonous beverage.
From that story, we learned that
our mother ritualized hating something — expected us
to admire her for it.
                        I took
                        that negative pattern
                        and spun it until I could have cloth enough
for an eloquent garment. Perhaps the lesson simply made you
feel yourself            helpless         ragged                      torn
I never
saw you that way, Marilyn,
though perhaps incomplete.
I pour a cup of Assam. Take a sip,
            let it wash through my mouth,
                        down my age-damaged throat,
think
of you sitting
with me in your Southern California 
backyard one May morning
next to the camellia bush.
I, as always with a cup of tea in my hand.
You, smoking.
I left all my family — you were part of it — 
left California and reinvented myself, even
mythologized myself as a tan “California Girl.”
You did not become an artist or a poet.
I suppose that’s why you felt damaged.
If only you knew how much imagination and sacrifice
it took for me to get away.
                        So many small things
                                   can save us
                                             from the damage
you talked of. For me, drinking that
first cup of Orange Pekoe
and making tea
my drink      risking rattlesnake poison
with every steaming cup,
a tiny emblem of a rebellion I still try to practice.
You left us so quickly, Marilyn,
and without any warning this January,
your house full of cancelled aspirations — glass
bowls, and cylinders, and huge globes
filled with sea scallop shells
            you combed the California seashores to 
                        find, collecting these empty shells, washed
free of their biological life.                                 Out of the ocean:
we two different daughters of a sailor.
 
april 3 
The spinning                      the scissors               the measuring
and thus our lives are given out
from the heavens, with unfair allotments
and varied, unaccountable fates,
born when we are, and to whom
you would have prevailed
in an age where women had to spin,
weave the material, cut it into britches and dresses,
undergarments and sheets, sew
and keep clean, warm, and comfortable a
household full or a castle full / men
children, hired hands, maidservants — you would have
done it
so well.
But you would have died young in such a world — 
diabetes, asthma, chronic bronchial infections
even in the 21st century where you lived to be
76       a world where all your skills were plied as
            substitute
for being an artist.
                      When I asked you a year ago,
not knowing that you would die this January,
what you would most like to have, if
money were not the object
             — since clearly all your measuring, cutting, and sewing
            had been for economical reasons,
            not art — 
you thought for a bit, raising your chin.
“A swimming pool in my backyard. One I could
step into every morning, swim, float — maybe in the afternoon
I’d go for a dip. Many evenings, I think,” she said
to me.                     Longing for some ocean? 
In our portrait,
if someone paints it, she will be 
sitting in a scallop shell,
her many jars of seashells behind her head. I
will be invisible, except for the spinning 
murmuration of birds that radiates
            past me. 
They read at her funeral, a poem from her journal
about lying on the beach,
the sand embracing her.
How much she loved it / felt safe,
felt released. Oh, Marilyn, all
those seashells emptied of their living
fleshy occupants. (the ugly parts that die and rot) now
glorious empty rooms
            in which to live an imaginary life,
                        to decorate,
to create beauty, 
            spaces to live
                        a different life.
What is left but your desires, locked in glass, and
an image of you walking
your beloved beaches, hands 
full of seashells, your
footprints measured, then quickly filled 
with the tidal flow.
 
april 4 
my spinning, 
            a whirlpool of faceted moving lights
                        Everything is Numbers!
down into a vortical glare that replaces
            my own mind’s desire 
                        Everything is Numbers! Everything is Numbers!
floating down
            like the crow’s
                        onyx feather
the 8
            of spades
                        random card
appearing
            last week
                        over gravel
8 legs on a spider,
            the arachnid so many people seem to
            fear, yet I lose track of time, stare into the wall
            or any space to replace real images with my imaginary
            ones, some random spider, who spins my fate
Crazy Eights, the child card game Marilyn and I played
pieces of eight, the dollar of
            pirate Spain — our childhood in Orange County
8, a vertical infinity sign
            everything is numbers / your
                        fire opal that Daddy brought
to you from India, and our mother
paid a jeweler to set it
into a ring. You wore the ring
more than sixty years. I suppose it was
on your finger at death
spinning,     spinning
to scintillate and iridesce
            We never had nice shoes.
 
april 5 
Easter Sunday. You and I always dyed
Easter eggs together, our mother busy at
her forty-hour-a-week bookkeeper’s job. I 
was intrigued with the colors,
but they never turned out so bright when
coloring the eggs. You, the artist,
were interested in the designs
to transfer onto the eggs,
cartoons, bunnies,
chicks.
We kept our eggs
separated from each other,
put them in separate bowls, neither
caring for the other’s creation. Still we
felt connected, even joyful, on those few holiday projects.
Not enough to make us friends.
My unwillingness to be like our classmates
embarrassed you. You chose invisibility
in school, rather than being known as “Diane’s
Sister.” 
That unwillingness to be like others 
was what made me a poet. So many little things, but that early decision
of yours, not to understand why I wanted to be weird,
is what made you make so 
many other small choices, preventing you 
from becoming an artist. “Look away,” our mother said to us,
when there were ugly things confronting us. 
I could not do that. You blame
our mother, yet it was you who decided to look away,
even though it meant not seeing the whole world,
even if meant you didn’t become an artist.
Poverty, of course, was the reason
we never had nice shoes.
 
april 6 
All numbers have
disappeared
                        instead
            there are mushrooms
            fungi that has always seemed
            more artful than tasty
            Sipping a cup of tea / soothes me
            as the mushrooms in a veloute sauce
            never could.
            I feel stymied / a rider
            with no horse. I want only to watch
            the stories unfold / the secret stories about why
            you chose to marry and have children / why
            I did not / the stories
                                    I try to banish
            blot out, replace with the diamond
            dog. A murmuration of iridescent starlings, 
            and the spider of eight, 
            twirling on its silk line, projecting infinity      art
            is made when you subject yourself
            to the unacceptable, then dredge
            yourself out,
                                    find a mineral replacement:
            infinity
            iridescer
            irised feather
            scintillater
                        a crystalline body whirls
            releasing me from
            the history, the stories it’s
            so hard to tell.
Until recent years, my sister
and I either ignored or disliked each other.
We fought continuously as children.
I have in my wrist a black bump that
protrudes near a vein.
                                    It’s the point of a pencil
that broke off and penetrated my wrist as we struggled
for the long yellow weapon.
A pencil, the weapon of a writer. But there was 
no bleeding, no seeming-wound to be dressed. 
We never told
our Mother, both too ashamed
of our brutality. I’ve never asked a doctor
about it, the pencil lead encapsulated
in my wrist. Nor ever spoken
of it to anyone.
I always wonder that so much must remain a secret?
Why
            we never had nice shoes.
 
april 7 
Young Marilyn, Old Marilyn.
there are places on this planet where
I find it hard to detect any beauty
therefore, silence
                        No nice shoes.
 
april 8 
there is silence
 
april 9 
Drinking
a blend of traditional
Darjeeling with a touch of Ceylon / this
tea takes me back to a Viennese visit, drinking
this very tea in the afternoon while my friend, Jonathan,
ate their famous Sacher torte.
The tea
seemed particularly aromatic — 
            “lightly scented with oil of bergamot
            and a hint of genuine Bourbon vanilla.”
Wishing for the moment in the past to reappear. I didn’t know
the tea from the Sacher Hotel
was as famous as the cake
                                until I found in my Upton Tea catalogue
                                a listing for “Scented Darjeeling”
                                under the heading “Earl Grey Blends”
This tea,
any cup of tea!
Hard to believe. no! Sad to
think my Mother almost spat out her first taste
of tea.
What worldly thing must I touch to
bring Marilyn back into my
sedate life, my sister Marilyn who died in January? 
Her hand — I’d like to imagine timidly touching her
      hand — Marilyn’s hand.
            Her right hand on which she wore the fire opal ring.
                        In that hand she’d be holding a cigarette.
Smoke and fire makes me think of her — 
            not water, though it was that Pacific ocean 
                        filled with seashells
                                    that she was in touch with. My old hands,
not really like hers at all. She had big hands for shaping things,
            while mine are small,      like birds.
~~~
The pond is sheathed in ice, a duck troubles the reeds, the air around us still enough to hear the baby stir, but we don’t know where it is yet. By the force of our longing it is getting made for us, as thrilled people, palms full of seed, long for the chickadees to light, and they do. Light.
~~~
As our daughter approaches graduation and   
puberty at the same time, at her
own, calm, deliberate, serious rate,
she begins to kick up her heels, jazz out her   
hands, thrust out her hipbones, chantI’m great! I’m great! She feels 8th grade coming   
open around her, a chrysalis cracking and   
letting her out, it falls behind her and   
joins the other husks on the ground,
7th grade, 6th grade, the
magenta rind of 5th grade, the
hard jacket of 4th when she had so much pain,   
3rd grade, 2nd, the dim cocoon of
1st grade back there somewhere on the path, and   
kindergarten like a strip of thumb-suck blanket
taken from the actual blanket they wrapped her in at birth.   
The whole school is coming off her shoulders like a   
cloak unclasped, and she dances forth in her   
jerky sexy child’s joke dance of
self, self, her throat tight and a
hard new song coming out of it, while her   
two dark eyes shine
above her body like a good mother and a   
good father who look down and
love everything their baby does, the way she   
lives their love.
~~~
We are of one mindand too much has not been saidabout all the quiet afternoons childhood offered us, lit gray like a cat, or blue, and cursed with an early moon. When father wore an apron or crept like a bear, we screamed.Nothing is so gone. Where is his record player or the channel that forked a distant year toward us,kind, slow magnet?There was a song we sharedwithout your listening, you widowed soul crawling away on your elbows.I sing it to my child, with a full hand Iflick its rapeseeds everywhere,clear, and slow,with all the sincerity its author indeed feltin his ten-gallon hatand his thin, whisky-soaked shirt.
~~~
Prairie winds blaze through her tumbled belly, and Emmett’s
red yesterdays refuse to rename her any kind of mother.
A pudge-cheeked otherwise, sugar whistler, her boy is
(through the fierce clenching mouth of her memory) a
grays-and-shadows child. Listen. Once she was pretty.
Windy hues goldened her skin. She was pert, brown-faced,
in every wide way the opposite of the raw, screeching thing
chaos has crafted. Now, threaded awkwardly, she tires of thesorries, the Lawd have mercies. Grief’s damnable tint
is everywhere, darkening days she is no longer aware of.
She is gospel revolving, repeatedly emptied of light, pulled
and caressed, cooed upon by strangers, offered pork and taffy.
Boys in the street stare at her, then avert their eyes, as if she
killed them all, shipped every one into the grips of Delta. She sits,
her chair carefully balanced on hell’s edge, and pays for sanity in
kisses upon the conjured forehead of her son. Beginning with A,
she recites (angry, away, awful) the alphabet of a world gone red.
Coffee scorches her throat as church ladies drift about her room,
black garb sweating their hips, filling cups with tap water, drinking,
drinking in glimpses of her steep undoing. The absence of a black
roomful of boy is measured, again, again. In the clutches of coffee,
red-eyed, Mamie knows their well-meaning murmur. One says She
a mama, still. Once you have a chile, you always a mama.
~~~
At one friend's home whole arsenals of guns
litter the lawn—bright plastic shapes my sons
pick their ways between to take proffered
popsicles. Later, on evening news, words
like "ambush,"  "strike," and "friendly fire"
punctuate glowing clips of wreckage in far
fields where other mother's children kneel to
aim and pray. And though it's clichéd, truth
be told, I wish one could keep her boys
from growing old and going off to die. Toys
need not rush us there. Instinct? No harm?
An urge to hoist whatever's there, hard-
wired within? Perhaps ignoble, I'm still glad
when one spits on his own: They're bad.
~~~
In my end is my beginning



prologue


With a sharp comb dipped in ink I’ve tattooed my life story all over my body. I’ve tattooed the footprints of my children — this way  I carry their walking with me; the footprints of my twins who died before their feet touched the ground. And the footprints of my one-year-old son, James, whom I pray for daily.
 
 
i: dent-de-lion

Because I bore the lion of my father’s country
my Maries and I picked dandelions —
    lion’s teeth.
All our childhood we picked them —
blowball, cankerwort,
doon-head-clock, witch’s gowan,
monk’s head, priest’s crown, worm roseMary Queen of Scots
Mary Queen of Scots
I held their gold beneath my chin;
imagined the lion rampant — its tongue,
its claws on my skin.
When I find the tallest stalk
I know how much I’ll grow.
I weave their sun bells
into my wedding bouquet. When I blow
seeds from the puffball
and three remain —
three children will I bear.Mary Queen of Scots
Mary Queen of Scots
 
 
ii: the caulbearer

When he was born
a shimmer of womb-skin
stretched across his face —
     I knew then
he would always be
with me.
I carried the caul
through all my years in captivity.
I imagined the membrane
attached to his plump baby face
like a coral headdress;
    I spoke to it,
willed it to carry my letters,
my messages into the drowning
depths of his night sleeping head.
 
 
iii: daffadowndilly

Despite the westerly gales,
despite the persistence of snowfall
the daffodils are opening.
They are opening
the way tapestries, labored at
one stitch at a time, suddenly arrive
at something whole.
Mary is stitching her name
over and over, pulling
the threads through
her long fingers.
For nineteen years
her name has been a plaything.
The ends of her fingers weave
puns and anagrams.
She is a woman
of many names —
she has woven a self
to match each name —
Tu te Marieras
Veritas Armata
Sa Vertue M’attire
Tu as Martyre
And the daffodils, they too
have many names —
Daffadowndilly, Narcissus,
Lenten lily, Easter bell.
How they weave themselves
out of the grass, out
of the green shoots
and sheathed leaves;
heads hung, necks
waiting to be snapped.
 
 
iv: the mermaid and the hare

Though all my life
I’ve worn dresses of mohair,
damask, or serge, stiffened in the neck
    with buckram;
though I wear breeding layers
of petticoats, farthingales
expanded with hoops of whalebone;
they’ve removed my heart-shaped cap,
my mourning veil, stripped
me bare to the waist,
replaced my silver hose-covered legs
with the wet mucus of a fish tail.
Two husbands dead —
they visit me nightly.
In dreams my hands turn into gudgeons,
chubs, loaches; the white magic
of a hare biting at my heels.
 
 
v: snowdrops

When they are ready
they send for her.
There are so many of them —
men who must watch her die.
The snowdrops outside her window
change color in the sunrise.
She is tired. She has lain awake all night.
She is dressed in black
with a long white veil — a caul
to keep her son close to her.
She counts the pearl acorn buttons
on her satin dress;
she counts the double string of rosary
hanging from her waist.
Her God is ready for her;
his body hangs above her
and she carries his cross
into the great hall.
Pearl queen —
she imagines the hall is filled with pearls
and the pearls are snowdrops.
Into the sheer purity of it she will fall.
She is going into the arms
of her mother.
In blood she came, in blood she will go —
stripped to red petticoat,
red bodice, red sleeves.
She feels herself glowing
in the center of the hall —
sister to the fireplace;
curls burning around her pale face,
her auburn eyes.
Hunkering for final prayer
she commits herself, kneels to the block;
hot fur, breath, the pounding
heart of her lapdog
pressing against her leg.
She gasps as the phoenix in her chest
breaks apart her body
with two blows —
one from each wing
as it rose.
 
 
vi: red and white

Though it was the color of mourning,
for my wedding I wanted to wear white —
The color of fresh snow and milk
The color of Isis and for wrapping the dead
The color cloaking the early monks
The color of the sacrificial lamb
The color of the transfiguration of our Lord
The color of the unicorn
My colors are red and white —
a white veil flows from my pale face
and tight red curls.
When I walk in the garden I scatter sunlight.
I am titanium white
I am Sirius
I am an Arctic fox
My heart is ermine
I am a white horse ridden by Conquest;
you will remember my name.
                
~~~
After Lorca



mother’s malisonThe burr of the wind is seeping through the door,
pink stumps of rhubarb are breaking through the soil.
Though it is February I have the mind of autumn.
Though it is February    
~~~
She is sixty. She lives
the greatest love of her life.
She walks arm-in-arm with her dear one,   
her hair streams in the wind.
Her dear one says:
“You have hair like pearls.”
Her children say:   
“Old fool.”
~~~
All master narratives of the mind in a rowboat and the rowboat as beautiful as the swamp
  glowing the dungeon-state lily pads, unfolding like riddles of water, the Plasticine
     heads of amphibians, speckled skin of religious fervor, and the razor-blade weeds.
All master narratives of the body in a rowboat at the bottom of the swamp that has no hands.
All master narratives of the spirit in the rowboat sky reflecting the infant swamp, clouds of filth, soil knotted like tupelos and toppled alphabets.
All master narratives of the skin in a rowboat inside a pine coffin of swamp water.
     All master narratives of thinking like a woman who says,  “I choose inappropriate relationships.”
All master narratives of dramatic structure in the soggy swamp, against the humid flags beating the wind.
All master narratives of mythology like my son saying, “and then he turned into a very big wolf.”
“I think he was very sad.”
“He has feelings too, you know.”
“I think he was sad because he got trapped inside the doors.”
“Oh my god, there are different Fenrirs.”
“Loki’s Fenrir met a different Fenrir.”
“Are wolves part of the cat family?”
“Hey, look up on your phone if they can change forms because these guys look different from the real Fenrir.”
“See that white picture where he’s up on top? He turns huge and tries to eat the sun.”
              “Oh, that’s a tough Fenrir.”
                      “I think he obeys the serpent.”
              “Now that’s sad Fenrir.”
                           “Or maybe Loki turns into the serpent.”
              “Oh, Loki, are you a master of evil?”
“I think they can change forms.”
~~~
Let not the title of my verse offend,    Nor let the pride contract her rigid brow; That helpless Innocence demands a friend,    Virtue herself will cheerfully allow: And should my pencil prove too weak to paint,    The ills attendant on the babe ere born; Whose parents swerved from virtue’s mild restraint,    Forgive the attempt, nor treat the Muse with scorn. Yon rural farm, where Mirth was wont to dwell,    Of Melancholy, now appears the seat; Solemn and silent as the hermit’s cell —    Say what, my muse, has caused a change so great? This hapless morn, an infant first saw light,    Whose innocence a better fate might claim, Than to be shunned as hateful to the sight,    And banished soon as it receives a name. No joy attends its entrance into life,    No smile upon its mother’s face appears, She cannot smile, alas! she is no wife;    But vents the sorrow of her heart in tears. No father flies to clasp it to his breast,    And bless the power that gave it to his arms; To see his form, in miniature expressed,    Or trace, with ecstacy, its mother’s charms. Unhappy babe! thy father is thy foe!    Oft shall he wish thee numbered with the dead; His crime entails on thee a load of woe,    And sorrow heaps on thy devoted head. Torn from its breast, by shame or pride,    No matter which — to hireling hands assigned; A parent’s tenderness, when thus denied,    Can it be thought its nurse is overkind? Too many, like this infant may we see,    Exposed, abandoned, helpless and forlorn; Till death, misfortune’s friend, has set them free,    From a rude world, which gave them nought but scorn. Too many mothers — horrid to relate!    Soon as their infants breathe the vital air, Deaf to their plaintive cries, their helpless state,    Led on by shame, and driven by despair, Fell murderers to become — Here cease, my pen,    And leave these wretched victims of despair; But oh! what punishments await the men,    Who in such depths of misery plunge the fair.
~~~
Fragile like a child is fragile. Destined not to be forever. Destined to become other To mother. Here I am Sitting on a chair, thinking About you. Thinking About how it was To talk to you.How sometimes it was wonderful And sometimes it was awful.How drugs when drugs were Undid the good almost entirely But not entirely Because good could always be seen Glimmering like lame glimmers In the window of a shop Called Beautiful Things Never Last Forever. I loved you. I love you. You were. And you are. Life is experience. It's all so simple. Experience is The chair we sit on. The sitting. The thinking Of you where you are a blank To be filled In by missing. I loved you. I love you like I love All beautiful things. True beauty is truly seldom. You were. You are In May. May now is looking onto The June that is coming up. This is how I measure The year. Everything Was My Fault Has been the theme of the song I've been singing, Even when you've told me to quiet. I haven't been quiet. I've been crying. I think you Have forgiven me. You keep Putting your hand on my shoulder When I'm crying. Thank you for that. And For the ineffable sense Of continuance. You were. You are The brightest thing in the shop windowAnd the most beautiful seldom I ever saw.
~~~
The children are back, the children are back— They’ve come to take refuge, exhale and unpack; The marriage has faltered, the job has gone bad, Come open the door for them, Mother and Dad.The city apartment is leaky and cold, The landlord lascivious, greedy and old— The mattress is lumpy, the oven’s encrusted, The freezer, the fan, and the toilet have rusted.The company caved, the boss went broke, The job and the love affair, all up in smoke. The anguish of loneliness comes as a shock— O heart in the doldrums, O heart in hock.And so they return with their piles of possessions, Their terrified cats and their mournful expressions, Reclaiming the bedrooms they had in their teens, Clean towels, warm comforter, glass figurines.Downstairs in the kitchen the father and mother Don’t say a word, but they look at each other As down from the hill comes Jill, comes Jack. The children are back. The children are back.
~~~
One will live to see the Caterpillar rut everything
they walk on—seacliff buckwheat cleared, relentless
ice plant to replace it, the wild fields bisected
by the scenic highway, canyons covered with cul-de-sacs,
gas stations, comfortable homes, the whole habitat
along this coastal stretch endangered, everything,
everyone, everywhere in it danger as well—
but now they're logging the one stilling hawk
Smith sights, the conspiring grasses' shh shhhh ssh,
the coreopsis Mattoni's boot barely spares,
and, netted, a solitary blue butterfly. Smith
ahead of him chasing the stream, Mattoni wonders
if he plans to swim again. Just like that
the spell breaks. It's years later, Mattoni lecturing
on his struggling butterfly. How fragile.
  
           • 
If his daughter spooled out the fabric
she's chosen for her wedding gown,
raw taffeta, burled, a bright hued tan,
perhaps Mattoni would remember
how those dunes looked from a distance,
the fabric, balanced between her arms,
making valleys in the valley, the fan
above her mimicking the breeze.
He and his friend loved everything
softly undulating under the coyest wind,
and the rough truth as they walked
through the land's scratch and scrabble
and no one was there, then, besides Mattoni
and his friend, walking along Dolan's Creek,
in that part of California they hated
to share. The ocean, a mile or so off,
anything but passive so that even there,
in the canyon, they sometimes heard it smack
and pull well-braced rocks. The breeze,
basic: salty, bitter, sour, sweet. Smith trying
to identify the scent, tearing leaves
of manzanita, yelling: "This is it. Here! This is it!"
his hand to his nose, his eyes, having finally seen
the source of his pleasure, alive.
               •
In the lab, after the accident, he remembered it,
the butterfly. How good a swimmer Smith had been,
how rough the currents there at Half Moon Bay, his friend
alone with reel and rod—Mattoni back at school
early that year, his summer finished too soon—
then all of them together in the sneaker wave,
and before that the ridge, congregations of pinking
blossoms, and one of them bowing, scaring up the living,
the frail and flighty beast too beautiful
to never be pinned, those nights Mattoni worked
without his friend, he remembered too.
He called the butterfly Smith's Blue.
 
~~~
You wanted to be a butcherbut they made you be a lawyer.You brought home presentswhen it was nobody’s birthday.Smashed platters of meatshe cut against the grain.Were a kind
 of portable shrine —   I was supposed to cultivate a field of  bliss, then return to my ordinary mind. You burned the filesand moved the office.Made your children feara different school.Liked your butter hardand your candy frozen.Were a kind
of diamond drill, drilling a hole right through my skull —   quality sleep, late November. What did it mean, “field of bliss” — A sky alive “with your greatest mentor” — I wore your shoes, big as boats,
flopped through the house —  while you made garlic eggs with garlic salt, what  “represents the living teaching” —  Sausages on toasted rye with a pickle, and a smother of cheese, and frosting
right out of  the can without the cake —  You ruled
with a knife in one hand and a fork in the other, you raged at my stony mother, while I banged   from my high chair, waving the bloodied bone   of something slaughtered — I was a butcher’s daughter. So all hail to me —  Os Gurges, Vortex Mouth, I gap my craw and the bakeries of the cities fall, I   stomp the docks — spew out a bullet stream of oyster shells, I’ll  drain the seas — the silos on every farm, the rice  from the paddy fields, the fruit from all the orchard trees, and then I’ll  eat the trees —   I’ll eat with money and I’ll eat with my teeth until the rocks   and the mountains curl and my blood sings —   I’m such a good girl   to eat the world.
~~~
Someone else’s child, not you, is running and running
down the beach. Both feet dig into the burning sand.
Two others heave one yellow bucket full of sugar-brown
 seaweed, their twin suits flowering 
a conflation of pink over blue behind the water. So
landmark cactus and landmine rock battlefield uphill toward
the early moon’s white horse head and each wave collapses to your
right, unsettles, shouting every half minute: have me, shhhh,
have me, shhhh, halve me, shhhh 
~~~
She dances only in her necklace,scotch-lit surely. He touches his glasses.Nightie-less, dugs whipping, hair sprung,some music inside, out, wet tonguetip at her lip, no mere palsied shuffle,both bony feet lifted, elbows awful.Shakespeare’s banshee of wailing parts,a woman with hair, a woman with warts.He’s fixed to the floor. Dear Heloise:do other presumed-sane mothers do this—wait in the dark after the ballto strip for their sons at the end of the hall?A dream, insists his sisterbut his first wife knows better.
~~~
As you told it to me — our clearest, most reflective conversationsso often then and there, in the middle of the night, staring intothe darkness from wherever the mind has perched in its wanderings — you left your mother and the home aide upstairs, and went downinto your father’s basement workroom to look for the rightsize screws; in her own wanderings, she has tugged off the frontdoor lock. Paneled in warped wood and abandoned like a mine, you find the string for the light in the middle of the room, as he must have known how to find it in the dark, and again you seethe pegboard walls covered with constellations of polishing tools,the larger buffers hooked onto the paneling like fuzzy planets, the smaller ones stuck in a Lucite block he customized to hold themlike the varied moons those hanging planets might need, or a miniature copse of fantastical trees. So, too, the see-through brick in which he drilled holes for the array of drill bits themselves,their swirled metal tops imitating a skyline of onion domes andtapered gothic towers. The room’s order had been disturbed by time, and the band saw, jigsaw, the sander, and free-standingmachines, the sized wrenches, pliers, picks, awls, and extra parts still hanging in their packages, the staple gun, lamps, brushes,gooseneck magnifying glass, soldering wire, conversion charts,the hundreds of other disordered tools, they might have been words in an encyclopedia before you could read more than a few words, and for you they were part of your father’s speech, or maybemore like your mother’s now, jumbled, rarely creating a sentence.With these tools he had sculpted a perfect cluster of grapes, still on their vine and still with their leaves; a wave, and a schoolof dolphins breaching; a formal replica of the Brooklyn Bridge with all its cabling; a bouquet of flowers — surfaces so smoothand rounded, objects so like their living counterparts we had nochoice but to understand the power of creation running throughthe mind then tools and hands like a current. You looked aroundfor the right size screws and came upon a small box markedGreen Permanent. And when you opened it you saw small tubesof paint, now just mud without his attention, you said, holding boththe power of what we do, and the sadness that it has to end.
~~~
I was so afraid. I couldn’t escape it. It was bigger than me and 3 horned. It dashed for me and missed and missed again. It leapt for me in my skirt. I was younger than it. It opened its parent mouth and I could die trying.
It would never never miss me.
It would stand on its two legs
and I was its message.
Running hands over this country’s pantalones.
I’m still surprised by our hulking silhouette.
Our hopeful investments and slightly whiny children.
Pompous jars of mustard in the fridge.
We as blunt as gum
under tables in restaurants.
~~~
The stork arrived alone one day,
beak sharpened like a bayonet.All the love you’ve had turned bad! he sang,
eyes boring through the dingy nets.
He hopped onto the patio.Good lord! Is this a rented flat?
                Behind the shed, albino rats
                were nuzzled on a family bed.
                He hovered over them, wings spread.
                Now this is how you do it! he said.
                He speared a worm and sucked it down.
                A rented flat, my god, he said.
Inside, I laid my hands around
my lump, my pumpkin-up-the-jumper.
I’d swapped the wine and cigarettes
for goji berries, spent the summer
asleep or stretched in yoga pose,Utkatasana, Dhyana    ...    
                The stork came hopping round the corner
                scraped his claw across the door — 
                Hello, hello? he called, polite,
                then screamed I will not be ignored!
                He had a bloody bone to pick,
                an oozy piece of mind to share.
                                I was eight months gone by Halloween.
                                Kids rang the rented bell in sheets
                                and slime. I tried “maternal” out
                                with chocolate limes and fizzy sweets.
                                The bird shrieked half the witchy night:
                                For god’s sake, are you stupid? Teeth!
                I waddled off to pack my case — 
                gorillas snoozing on the onesies,
                pink booties, pads to catch the blood.
                When they tugged that baby out of me
                he came up laughing, blessed the midwife
                with a fiery arc of golden pee
and through the skylight of the ward
I saw the stork retreat, zigzagging
up into the evening sky,
a fading squawk, the beat of wings.
Then they laid that baby on my chest
to feed, and cut the navel string — 
~~~
Christ bore what suffering he could and died
a young man, but you waited years to learn
how to heal. Only when you could did you
touch the man whose body blistered for yours.
You posted him no news for sixteen terms,
then just a signed graduation notice.
The letter he wrote that week asked only,
Now that your books are closed, can boys come in?
At your wedding, you buried the woman
you thought you knew inside a stranger’s name.
This is how you found yourself: thirty-three,
nursing a son. Soon there was another.
Your mind had already begun to walk.
But you were a mother. Those cribs held you.
~~~
1
The perfect mother lets the cat
sleep on her head. The
children laugh.
Where is she?
She is not carefully ironing the starched
ruffles of a Sunday dress.
What does she say?
She does not speak.
Her head is under the cat and
like the cat, she sleeps.
       2
But her children are in a marsh!
Bogged, they have gone wild.
Yet, no one should worry.
See, they are there, in a sunny kitchen.
They drink cups of soup and wipe
their faces with yellow napkins.
What does it matter if
they are hatching plots, if
in their waking dreams
the poor cat is trapped
its hair
standing on end?
       3
Where shall we go? We ask the perfect
mother. What
do you want of us? She is no
where to be found.
Not in the cookie jar
we have broken to bits
not under the shiny kitchen floor
not on our lips.
Here we are transfixed,
mourning the perfect mother, and she
is caught in the trapped cat
of her children’s dreams.
~~~
The carpet in the kindergarten room was alphabet blocks; all of us fidgeting on bright, primary letters. On the shelf sat that week's inflatable sound. The th was shaped like a tooth. We sang about brushing up and down, practiced exhaling while touching our tongues to our teeth. Next week, a puffy U like an upside-down umbrella; the rest of the alphabet deflated. Some days, we saw parents through the windows to the hallway sky. Look, a fat lady, a boy beside me giggled. Until then I'd only known my mother as beautiful.
~~~
After “She was the song of my dark hour,” a photograph by Paul Tañedo



I woke up
and I was old—
 
It’s hard to judge
if this new country
 
was worth
its costs—
 
Fil and Eileen
educated themselves—
 
They blessed me
with their happiness—
 
Roy and Glen
lost themselves
 
to a car accident
and something worse
 
(that I will not reveal
even for a poem)—
 
When I see myself
reflected in a mirror
 
I turn away to hide
both my eyes, all of my self—
 
when half of your
children are destroyed
 
the half who flourish
cannot compensate
 
exactly
                        as if
 
a heart breaksexactly down the middle.
 
~~~
The boys who fled my father's house in fear Of what his wrath would cost them if he found Them nibbling slowly at his daughter's ear, Would vanish out the back without a sound, And glide just like the shadow of a crow, To wait beside the elm tree in the snow. Something quite deadly rumbled in his voice. He sniffed the air as if he knew the scent Of teenage boys, and asked, "What was that noise?" Then I'd pretend to not know what he meant, Stand mutely by, my heart immense with dread, As Father set the traps and went to bed.
~~~
Germ of new life, whose powers expanding slow For many a moon their full perfection wait,— Haste, precious pledge of happy love, to go Auspicious borne through life's mysterious gate. What powers lie folded in thy curious frame,— Senses from objects locked, and mind from thought! How little canst thou guess thy lofty claim To grasp at all the worlds the Almighty wrought! And see, the genial season's warmth to share, Fresh younglings shoot, and opening roses glow! Swarms of new life exulting fill the air,— Haste, infant bud of being, haste to blow! For thee the nurse prepares her lulling songs, The eager matrons count the lingering day; But far the most thy anxious parent longs On thy soft cheek a mother's kiss to lay. She only asks to lay her burden down, That her glad arms that burden may resume; And nature's sharpest pangs her wishes crown, That free thee living from thy living tomb. She longs to fold to her maternal breast Part of herself, yet to herself unknown; To see and to salute the stranger guest, Fed with her life through many a tedious moon. Come, reap thy rich inheritance of love! Bask in the fondness of a Mother's eye! Nor wit nor eloquence her heart shall move Like the first accents of thy feeble cry. Haste, little captive, burst thy prison doors! Launch on the living world, and spring to light! Nature for thee displays her various stores, Opens her thousand inlets of delight. If charmed verse or muttered prayers had power, With favouring spells to speed thee on thy way, Anxious I'd bid my beads each passing hour, Till thy wished smile thy mother's pangs o'erpay. 
~~~
The woman at the Salvation Army who sorts and prices is in her eighties
and she underestimates the value of everything, for which I am grateful.
 
Lightly used snow suits, size 2T, are $6 and snow boots are $3.
 
There is a little girl, maybe seven, fiddling with a tea set. Her mother
inspects drapes for stains.
 
Sometimes the very old and lonely are looking for an opening.
 
She glances up from her pricing and says something about the tea set
and a baby doll long ago.
 
I am careful not to make eye contact, but the mother with drapes has
such softness in her shoulders and her face and she knows how to say
the perfect kind thing—“What a wonderful mother you had.”
 
“Yes, she was.”
 
Why do children sometimes notice us and sometimes not?
 
From the bin of dolls: “What happened to your mother?”
 
“She died.”
 
The woman at the Salvation Army who sorts and prices is crying a little.
She seems surprised to be crying. “It’s been eighty years and I still miss
her.”
 
When my daughter was born I couldn’t stop thinking about how we
were going to die. If we were drowning, would it be better to hold her
to me even as she fought away or should I let her float off to wonder why
her mother didn’t help her? What if it’s fire and I have one bullet left? I
made sure my husband knew if there were death squads and he had to
choose, I’d never love him again if he didn’t choose her. If I’m lucky,
her crying face is the last thing I’ll see.
 
The mother with drapes is squeezing her daughter’s shoulder, trying to
send a silent message, but children are children. “Why did she die?”
 
“She was going to have a baby and—And she died.”
 
“But she was a wonderful mother.”
 
I’m holding a stack of four wooden jigsaw puzzles of farm animals,
dinosaurs, jungle animals, and pets. Each for a quarter.
 
“It’s silly how much I still miss her.” She takes out a tissue and wipes
her eyes and then her nose.
 
When my grandmother threw her sister, Susie, a 90th birthday party,
one hundred people came, including 5 of the 6 brothers and sisters. At
dusk only a few of us were left, nursing beers with our feet kicked up
on the bottom rungs of various walkers.
 
Susie said then to my grandmother, “Can you think of all the people
watching us in heaven now? And our mother must be in the front row.”
 
Grandma took her sister’s hand. “Our mother—Estelle.”
 
“Yes—her name was Estelle. I forgot that.”
 
They looked so happy then, saying her name back and forth to each
other. Estelle. Estelle.
~~~
Always fatal, Tay-Sachs disease affects
only Eastern European children.
                                          For R.N.B.



Over the waves of his chest,
you watch the sun go up, again. How
accidentally the birds cross it!
How seemingly accidental.
 
What random choices led you
to him—your darling
from the same steppes
as Zhivago's, and your own.
 
Then he's dressed, and you're almost.
Leaning over, he pulls your slip up
to put his hand over that fat part of you,
where swims the swimmer. Enter
                                                       Tay and Sachs,
two men good at identifying
            a certain kind of certain death
                        due to a certain mix of genes
                                    of children with certain parents.
 
Today you go to determine your chances,
rather, its chances,
all euphemism unable to cover
the chance red spot on the growing retina.
 
After your doctor has his way,
you can see on the screen
the little swimmer trying to escape,
holding the needle with both hands,
                                                                     just reflex.
                                      The verdict
takes time to swell and ripen.
The doctor offers his only balm, a curse:
knowledge without antidote. All you know
 
is that the immortals throw no bones,
that you inherit nothing
but genes and bravery, both faltering.
You trot back
 
to work and your new belly
swirls with the fetal pig you took the eyes from,
grade ten. To market, to market.
You pull your goddamn shrinking coat
 
around you. Nothing like
the stir of life that has no chance.
You shrug. It’s only the size of your finger,
you don’t care—
 
                                    But knowing at the end
of ten hours’ pitched screaming,
your insides reversing, you get
                                                           nothing—
           
            What goes where with death?
You know all about life.
You majored in biology, pirouetted
through the wedding night.
 
Does it make sounds yet?
Choose happiness but accept the truth:
the child might die, you tell your husband.
                                                      Suffer and die.
 
In the three-week wait you type
and each hammer moves the days along.
Waiting, every word from everyone hurts,
every Good day,
 
                        careless or concerned,
every word. The only sympathy you want
is the same cruelty shared, all else
grates. Inside, it spins—in fear?
 
What you must swallow
is the sugar cube of your continuing,
the inescapable desire to pee
that stirs you mornings, hours before dawn.
 
But if,
              at the end of these weeks of waiting,
the white-masked priests come back bearing
no news, which is their best,
 
you will have brushed off death,
rimed him bright and acceptable                    
                                          and seen it slant.
Either way.
                          That is, what happens
doesn’t matter. You eat.
You lie down. The sun shrinks.
              The daily din you’re thankful for
 
rescinds its paper currency that nothing backs up.
               Your husband puts on a pot to boil, and another. He can’t
feel it inside, though he’s eaten the same sour apple,
bearing half the genes,
 
those underclothes, the bra, the brief
of the body. You are dumb
before his helplessness. The cord to belly to cord
will not be broken,
 
ripped untimely as it may be.
Mama has happened
                              and the rocking horse of your heart
heaves on.
~~~
I stand there under the high limbs of locust
watching my father point a black gun into the air
his arms steepled for the stillness
required to split the proverbial hair
with a BB. I would like to throw a red hat 
to catch what will smack from the barrel
but instead the songbird drops fast—a warm
stone through liquid swimming between us.
The stink of yellow sulfur thick. And the twist
of his mouth, like tangled purple boughs
or crossed legs of what he never dreamed he'd hit.
Years after, I will admit only to so much. Blue
moon tomorrow. Do we ever get a second
chance? It's what I don't say that speaks loudest.
~~~
(for my daughter)



Composed in a shine of laughing, Monique brings in sacks
of groceries, unloads them, straightens, and stretches her back.
The child was a girl, the girl is a woman; the shift   
is subtle and absolute, worn like a gift.
The woman, once girl once child, now is deft in her ease,   
is door to the forum, is cutter of keys.
In space that her torque and lift have prefigured and set free   
between her mother and her child the woman stands   
having emptied her hands.
~~~
His car rolls up to the curb, you switch your mood, which doll to bring and rush out again on the sliding steps of your shoes half-on, forgetting to zip  your new pink coat in thirty degrees, teeth and hair not brushed, already  passing the birch, mid-way between us, too far to hear my fading voicecalling my rope of reminders as I lean out in my robe, another Saturdaymorning you’re pulled toward his smile, his gifts, sweeping on two flattened rafts from mine to his, your fleeting wave down the rapids of the drive.
~~~
Most truly honoured, and as truly dear,If worth in me or ought I do appear,Who can of right better demand the sameThan may your worthy self from whom it came?The principal might yield a greater sum,Yet handled ill, amounts but to this crumb;My stock's so small I know not how to pay,My bond remains in force unto this day;Yet for part payment take this simple mite,Where nothing's to be had, kings loose their right.Such is my debt I may not say forgive,But as I can, I'll pay it while I live;Such is my bond, none can discharge but I,Yet paying is not paid until I die.
~~~
This is all I am to her now: a pair of legs in running shoes, two arms strung with braided wire. She heaves a carton sagging with CDs  at me and I accept it gladly, lifting with my legs, not bending over,      raising each foot high enough to clear the step. Fortunate to be  of any use to her at all, I wrestle, stooped and single-handed,  with her mattress in the stairwell, saying nothing as it pins me,  sweating, to the wall. Vacuum cleaner, spiny cactus, five-pound sacks  of rice and lentils slumped against my heart: up one flight  of stairs and then another, down again with nothing in my arms.
~~~
I don't love my son
the way I thought
my mother should love me
so I handed him a shoe box
to put the dead bird in
and shut the door. 
It was a mistake, 
not to be sure he buried it, 
not to grab the children
gathered at my back door
by their shoulders
to push them into a half-circle
and a prayer. 
Should have made them
take turns digging the hole,
each one of their pudgy hands
finger stiff red's box
to lower it to the ground. 
It wasn't my place
to teach other women's children
about death, so my own son
snuck the shoe box
into his backpack,
dead-eyed bird rolling
like a plastic prize ball,
told the principal
this cold puff
of field bird
had been his pet. 
See him
clutching a coffin
the size of his feet,
eyes wide over a pout,
giving a man a reason
good enough to hold him. 
                                                        after Louise Glück
~~~
               Let’s say I’m Captain Cook, setting sail to drift
until currents push me
into a certain lane, certain highway
with its humpbacked traffic bobbing along.
 
               My young aren’t strapped in the back
flinging Cheerios into the crevices like a game of darts
but moored in the house with my patient wife
so I can seek my destiny here—
 
And I have no destination, not the Friendly Center
or aquarium—I journey only
to find a usable route.
 
               I’m stewing the bones a fourth time
to leach any last savor for my
broth—
               not gumming pirate birthday cake
with seafoam-colored frosting, nor
placing my order at the drive-thru
(no, not a Frosty, not a McRib)­­—
 
               Place-names are still to be scrawled,
new-minted to mark
this passage, its weather and bits of luck.
 
The usable route’s a velvet highway I’ll trace
to parchment—a new day, a new world,
 
not the GPS lady recalculating—
 
               These words held in my mouth,
               these words a way to inscribe we are not lost
in a vast expanse of lostness.
 
~~~
I once was a child am a child am someone's child
            not my mother's not my father's the boss
      gave us special treatment treatment for something
                  special a lollipop or a sticker glitter from the
toy box the better we did the better the plastic prize made
            in China one year everyone got a spinning top
      one year everyone got a tap on their shoulders
                  one year everyone was fired everyone
fired but me one year we all lost our words one year
            my father lost his words to a stroke
      a stroke of bad luck stuck his words
                  used to be so worldly his words fired
him let him go without notice can they do that
            can she do that yes she can in this land she can
      once we sang songs around a piano this land is your land
                  this land is my land in this land someone always
owns the land in this land someone who owns
            the land owns the buildings on the land owns
      the people in the buildings unless an earthquake
                  sucks the land in like a long noodle
~~~
The marriage ran under their skin, a rash, or maybe
all that red wine, luminescent cocktail hours
in which lost books were rediscovered, or just a rash,
a reaction sending out runners across her chest,
a vine, something close, ruby scarves coming back
into fashion, their son coming back
from school, from the yard, but now, dinnertime
and the family parted, split houses, her ex and his anger
spread down the long hallway of their house
and into the windows of her new apartment, their daughter’s doubled
beds, her doubled face in family portraits that double
in frequency, a family set down and another, this dinnertime
and more red wine, our faces flush with love and sympathy,
the mother decides to see the son again, and so
our doubled flashlights giving us heaven and earth,
all of it safe or at least unmoving, the tall fence
her ex built to hide the little grave, to guard the lot
in this registered historic district (all of the houses
bear their stories on a plaque, their first stories,
run-on, this little town with no street lights, just moon,
cedars), the tall fence behind which is the yard, blue,
in this yard no marker stone and under this stone
their son’s everything, no double,
no double
~~~
On her Son H.P. at St. Syth’s Church where her body also lies interred



What on Earth deserves our trust?Youth and Beauty both are dust.Long we gathering are with pain,What one moment calls again.Seven years childless marriage past,A Son, a son is born at last:So exactly lim’d and fair,Full of good Spirits, Meen, and Air,As a long life promised,Yet, in less than six weeks dead.Too promising, too great a mindIn so small room to be confined:Therefore, as fit in Heaven to dwell,He quickly broke the Prison shell.So the subtle Alchemist,Can’t with Hermes Seal resistThe powerful spirit’s subtler flight,But t’will bid him long good night.And so the Sun if it ariseHalf so glorious as his Eyes,Like this Infant, takes a shrowd,Buried in a morning Cloud.
~~~
I will hear his sleep
in and through my own, my sleep
will be bathed in his as if we slept
in one same fluid
My sleep floats within a listening
so deep that the separating
spaces of air become
as pliant and full as snowfall,
its singing silence as profound
My ears and his throat —
the sensation of anticipated
hearing close inside the ear
and the incipient murmur or cry
forming at the end of his sleep —
borne like birds and thrumming
on the air of rooms between us
My own sleep will be his
clock, safely keeping time,
his sleep tunes my dreams to listen,
our sleep binds the hour,
heavy and warm,
into a blanket of air
and sound
~~~
While the tennis ball went back and forth in timeA girl was burning. While the tonic took its greenyAcid lime, a girl was burning. While the ruby sun fell
From a cloud’s bent claws and Wimbledon was wonAnd lost, we sprawled along the shore in chairs,We breathed the azure airs alongside
A girl with the thinnest arms all scarred and scoredWith marks she’d made herself —She sat with us in flames
That not all saw or saw but couldn’t say at riskOf seeming impolite. And later we’d all thinkOf the monk who’d doused himself with gas,
Lit a match, then sat unmoving and alert amidDevouring light. She didn’t speak. She touchedNo aspect of our silly selves.
I was the awkward guest everybody hardly knew.She was an almost ghost her mother sawErasing the edges of herself each day
Smudging the lines like charcoal while her parentsRedrew her secretly into being over andAgain each night and dawn and sleepless
All years long. Having seen that mother’s love,I testify: It was ocean endless. One drop could’veBrought to life the deadest Christ, and she
Emptied herself into that blazing child with all her mightAnd stared a hundred million miles intoThe girl’s slender, dwindling shape.
Her father was the devoted king of helicopter padAnd putting green. His baby burned as weAll watched in disbelief.
I was the facile friend of friends insisting on a hugWho hadn’t been along for years of doctors, wards,And protocols. I forced her sadness close. I said
C’mon let’s hug it out. Her arms were whiteBirch twigs that scissored stiffly at my neck till sheSlid on. That night we watched
Some fireworks on the dewy lawn for it wasIndependence Day. Soon after, she was gone.She was the flaming tower we all daredTo jump from. So she burned.
~~~
there is ghazal swimming inside of her, wanting to be born. on the matter of foretelling, of small miracles, cactus flowers in bloom on this city fire escape, where inside your tongue touches every inch of her skin, where you lay your hand on her belly and sleep. here, she fingers the ornate remains of ancient mosques. here, some mythic angel will rise from the dust of ancestors’ bones. this is where you shall worship, at the intersections of distilled deities and memory’s sharp edges. the country is quite a poetic place; water and rock contain verse and metaphor, even wild grasses reply in rhyme. you are not broken. she knows this having captured a moment of lucidity; summer lightning bugs, sun’s rays in a jelly jar.
 
this is not a love poem, but a cove to escape the flux, however momentary. she is still a child, confabulating the fantastic; please do not erode her wonder for the liquid that is your language. there is thunderstorm in her chest, wanting to burst through her skin. this is neither love poem nor plea. this is not river, nor stone.
 
 
 
 
~~~
The baby sleeps.Sunlight plays upon my lap, through doily leaves a black lab comes,a scotty goes, the day wears on, the baby wakes.The good birds sing,invisible or seldom seen, in hidden kingdoms, grateful for the in-between. The baby sleeps. Elsewhere the Queen rolls byon gusts of cheer — ladies wave and bless her reign. The baby frets. The baby feeds.The end of lunch, a daytime moon. The leavesare lightly tinkered with.It’s spring? No, autumn? Afternoon? We’ve sat so long, we’ve walkedso far. The woods in shade, the woods in sun, the singing birds,the noble trees.The child is grown. The child is gone. The black lab comes,his circuit done. His mistress coils his scarlet lead.
~~~
decreed my mother-in-law as my husband
passed the platter of inward-turning
soft-skulled Martian baby
heads around the table,
and they were O so shyly slyly
jostling each other with their boiled-
green sardonic gossip
(what was the news they told?)
when he sharply answered, “Mother,
have you ever
eaten an artichoke?”
                               “No,”
she said, majestic, “but I just know
I don’t care for them, don’t
care for them at all”—
for truly, if they weren’t Martian
they were at the least Italian
from that land of “smelly cheese”
she wouldn’t eat, that land of oily
curves and stalks, unnerving pots
of churning who knows what,
and she, nice, Jewish, from the Bronx,
had fattened on her Russian-
Jewish mother’s kugel, kosher
chicken, good rye bread ....
Bearded, rosy, magisterial
at forty-five, he laughed,
kept plucking, kept on
licking those narcissistic
leaves, each with its razor point
defending the plump, the tender
secret at the center, each
a greave or plate of edible
armor, so she smiled too,
in the flash of dispute,
knowing he’d give her ice cream later,
all she wanted, as the rich
meal drew to an end
with sweets dished out in the lamplit
circle, to parents, children, grandma—
the chocolate mint she craved,
and rocky road he bought especially
for her, whose knees were just
beginning to crumble from arthritis,
whose heart would pump more creakily
each year, whose baby
fat would sag and sorrow
as her voice weakened, breathing
failed until she too
was gathered into the same
blank center
where her son
at sixty bearded still, still
laughing, magisterial
(though pallid now)
had just a year before
inexplicably settled.
~~~
              Night. Or what                                        they have of  it at altitudelike this, and filtered                           air, what wasin my lungs just an hour ago is now                            in yours,                                         there’s only so much air to go                around. They’re makingmore people
~~~
All morning my daughter pleading, outsideoutside. By noon I kneel to button hercoat, tie the scarf to keep her hood in place.This is her first snow so she strains againstthe ritual, spooked silent then whining, restless under each buffeting layer,uncertain how to settle into thisleashing. I manage at last to tunnelher hands into mittens and she barks andwon’t stop barking, her hands suddenly paws.She is reduced to another being,barking, barking all day in these restraints.For days after, she howls into her hands,the only way she tells me she wants out.
~~~
In one, I married the first man who asked and
I endured. Took as little space as I could,
opened my hands and he’d place his faults,
lined up like eucharists into my palms until
overflowing. Maybe if he’d found God sooner,
the baby would have lived. Maybe I wouldn’t
have found myself alone between blue light and
linoleum passing something too small to survive.
Maybe if I loved him enough, she’d have wanted
to live. Maybe I would have too. Maybe I’d have played
the hymns his God demanded on the church piano.
He’d stand in the pulpit singing, his tenor swinging high,
then low again and I could remember God myself.
Maybe I would have stayed for that. Maybe when
he called years later, I could have returned. Maybe
I would have loved his children and traded them for the dead.
Maybe I would wear white on Sundays, pull on my gloves,
hold the women after they raised up during service, wipe
their sweat, and hold them fast as they cry hallelujah.
Hallelujah. Maybe I would be the woman swooning.
Maybe his God would move through me just once like that,
maybe God would fill me so tight with spirit, I’d split like stars.
~~~
A flashlight rolls over the walls of a cave,
searching, until the transducer comes to a halt
low on my still-flat belly.
The doctor says, "There's definitely a kid in there."
Easy for her to say—she sees this all day.
But it took us years to get to this point.
Years in the dark. Months of nothing and never.
Her expert eye interprets the grainy screen,
which I can't stop reaching toward,
pretending to point to features but really
just longing to touch the image,
as if it were somehow more there than in me,
this tiny, blurry, leaping bison or bear,
something from Altamira or Lascaux,
from the hand of an ancestor—
the first art we know.
~~~
I have hidden your lost teeth in the net of all my famous hair
And with foresight promised your umbilicus
To several minor gods. I paid your fee in fawn skin
& the lightest fringe of tissue, all the quiet noons assembled,
In yard stars & the light of phosphorescent pens,
The dioramas that it takes to fill lacunae, in ancestral knots
That tell the story of our humble people: watchmakers,
Mainly, ventriloquists & scholars of quintessence,
Amateur lifeguards I meant to surpass. How I loved
My green & distant futures! But I love you more
From late Holocene out to the farthest buoy, unto
Blackmail & a verb that means renouncing Christ
Or else describes the path of sap before it’s amber,
Before it dimples, just a little, to collect — 
~~~
Come home, our sons, young drivers,
tell us you’re safe, not detained again
by police for your dark color,
sprocketed hair and a crime
you didn’t commit.
Maybe your car’s the wrong make
or rusty in a neighborhood
where cars park in garages at night.
 
Once, when you saw a squad car
you remembered Officer Smiley
and his dog that did tricks
in read-aloud books at J.J. Hill School.
Now, as you reach for your license
with shaking hands, tension raises
the chance something will go wrong.
 
This poem is for you, sons,
and for everyone who is afraid—
citizens of police, police of citizens.
It’s for Philando Castile,
a black school lunch supervisor
in an inner city school
who memorized children’s names
and their food allergies.
And it’s for the policeman
who stopped a car with a damaged taillight.
After he used his gun, his voice broke
like a frightened child’s.
 
Come home, sons, to mothers like me,
alert at night waiting for car lights
to beam in front of our house,
for the car to belong to our sons,
and our sons
to still belong to the world.
~~~
I still keep it hidden in the jar of  saltwater you gave me     don’t worry, no one can hear me, my husband’s in the bathroom & my daughter’s in her bedroom wearing those headphones made of sponges on her ears
yes, I’ve kept it all these years, and kept it hidden, but — I have to tell you something:
something about it has changed
recently     has changed     since the last time we talked     the shell has opened, and — 
calm down      please      I’m about to tell you     I’ve waited years to tell you     how?     how could I have called you?     I don’t know where you live: I don’t even know your name!
so     I’m telling you now: the gluey seam that held it closed     at some point it began to dissolve     I don’t know     around Christmastime, I suppose     but it was gradual     subtle     not something easily seen through water, through glass      so perhaps it started earlier than that, but that’s when I first noticed — 
(of course it’s still alive     I know because I know)    
so     after the seal first began to loosen, things accelerated after that     and I could see inside of  it     and what I saw was a tongue     but very pale     the tongue was white, in fact, and thin as a strip of paper     also smooth     no bumps or grooves     but there was no doubt: this was a tongue
I’m sorry    I used the past tense only so that you might understand how it appeared to me when it was new and strange     to describe to you what I saw then     not because it’s changed     because it hasn’t      except in its familiarity
I spend an hour with it every morning      and if the weather’s mild, after they’ve gone to bed, I take it out at night, lie on my back in the grass, hold the jar on my chest, and together we watch the metallic flower petals spin at each other in that dangerous memory of  heaven, or the past    please     don’t cry    no one’s to blame     and nothing’s ruined, nothing’s wrong      there’s no discomfort      there seems to be no pain     there’s only time, letting something looser     and I’ve made the preparations     it will die when I die
no, she isn’t listening    and if  she is     well, then the eavesdropper’s punishment is hers      she can’t be spared      all her life spent holding her breath    only to hear     the sound absorbed by moss stuffed into the ears of  a stillborn kitten      all her life     over and over again at the kitchen table     playing the tapes of a conversation she recorded with a microphone slipped into a coffin thirty-six years ago     finding no meaning in those     and searching for the jar in which she’s certain it still floats      the tongue of  her mother’s ghost
~~~
Our sorrow had neither place nor carrier-away,
and dared not hover over the child
whose breath opened as transom
of a frail house.
Nor could we put our sorrow in the dictionary,
for ghastliness already shot out its own defining
in rags of fired light.
Pigeons would not sleek it
over their dirty coats, nor fly
sorrow against the aviary's sharp fence.
Each day bridgeless, each night birdless,
all the nocturnals needless at the expanse
of our nightwatch.
                                     But wake at the moon,
we could, mumbling, are wein a horror show?—inside of sleep
our shock-white minds caught on reels
where a child's body breaks the heart
and the mother can't know
if she counts as a mother. I don't know
if the child heard
what wept at the bedside,
orderlies snapping smelling salts from chalky bullets
against all the mothers falling,
all the fathers under
what each branch let down:
there's a hidden weight to snow.
 
~~~
A mother possum crawled down the chimney
the spring Donny came to us
because both sets of his parents had kicked him out,
the same April after your dad and I divorced
when you kicked a hole in the dining room wall.
The possum was swollen with young
she would later carry, half-grown, on her back
or hanging from her thick, hairless tail.
“An oversized rat with maternal instincts,”
your dad once said.
 
Instead of one angry son, I now had two–
fifteen and seventeen–
two forged signatures on absence excuses,
two discipline committee meetings,
two conferences with the principal.
While I worked,
you shared contraband beer,
as well as the basement bedroom
with its fieldstone fireplace
in which you found the possum one cool evening.
 
Laughing and cheering, you teamed up
to cage her with a trash can,
carry her to the alley out back and dump her.
The possum squeezed back
down the chimney twice more. The third time
you threw her out on Troost Avenue, screaming
for a car to smash her beneath its tires.
She must have been near her time,
desperate for a nest,
to crawl back down after that.
The noise woke me after midnight.
Donny had clubbed her with his nunchuks.
You both kicked and stomped
her head as she lurched, stumbled
between your feet.
Halfway down
the basement steps I stopped,
seeing your faces. The possum fell
limp. I backed slowly up the stairs.
 
In the morning, you couldn’t meet my eyes.
I just made you clean up the mess.
~~~
Who is the barber
with the straight razor
at the neck of the Mad King,
the physician of the Don
who must hold his broken feet
and cloudy wisps of hair
from between his legs
while he knows nothing?
The possibilities
are numerous—what jobs
we get ourselves into.
I feel like at this moment
I could be anyone in the world
because I could be
a hundred objects
of torture—whatever
the mind can come up with
has been done,
~~~
Untitled, from the Silueta series, 1980, by Ana Mendieta 
has appeared to the mountain
dwellers, her grief  engraved 
where stone softens to clay. Keep
your eyes sharp for a dagger. 
In its hilt, you’ll find her face
pressed to the earth’s cheek. Kiss 
this sacred spot before the rains
wash it away like her orphaned 
feet. Notched heart cradles
a planet heavy with night- 
mares flying into empty mouths.
Listen for their thirsty murmurs. 
She’ll push her ponderous child
into the dew of  a San Felipe dawn, 
name him Salvador. They’ll rest
beneath a web spun umbilical, 
eclipsed from our human eyes.
 
• 
Our Lady
 
stone             clay 
 
earth rain orphaned heart 
eclipsed
 
~~~
Lullee, lullay,I could not love thee moreIf thou wast Christ the King.Now tell me, how did Mary knowThat in her womb should sleep and growThe Lord of everything?Lullee, lullay,An angel stood with herWho said: “That which doth stirLike summer in thy sideShall save the world from sin.Then stable, hall, and innShall cherish Christmas-tide.”Lullee, lullay,And so it was that Day.And did she love Him moreBecause an angel cameTo prophesy His name?Ah no, not so,She could not love Him more,But loved Him just the same.Lullee, lullay. Originally appeared in the December 1938 issue of Poetry magazine.
~~~
Does my little son miss the smell
of his first mother? I wonder
as the mewl of his mouth
opens toward a plastic bottle
that is not her breast.
 
Sudden new mother,
I bury my nose deep
into his skullcap of ringlets,
his starry cheesiness.
 
In her good-bye letter to him
sealed in his album
with a birth certificate, which now
list my name as Mother,
 
his first mother writes
she nursed him briefly
after he emerged into
the second room of his world.
 
I think of milk, volcanic
and insistent, answering
the newborn’s gigantic thirst,
a primal agreement between
generosity and greed.
 
Sometimes I press my nose
to the glass of that place
where a mother and my child
belong to each other;
I cannot imagine coming
between them.
 
But then I want to lick him all over
with a cow’s thick tongue,
to taste him and mark him as mine
so if the other mother returns,
she will refuse her handled calf
smeared with my smell.
 
~~~
What will you be like when the daylight comes? I’m glad you’re Diana Ross, today. What is she scraping off her face? Two strobing flashlights at the apex of the cheekbones, one on the tip of the nose. I’m so glad you’re Dorothy. Nineties depression chic nirvana flannel and hobo overalls accented with stilettos are back falling through lawn chairs as Rodney King. Your dog ran away in the night and I’m celebrating. Caleb caught a case and I’m running through the streets like there’s a bouquet of swords in one fist and balloons in the other, dissembling my distress. In high school we read Camus’s Rebel but stayed up till midnight to catch the second airing of Jerry Springer on three way. I mostly remember the brawls and such earnest DNA testing, such universal are you my daddy tales. We’d stay on the phone and wait for the results. The audience hated reconciliation and everyone was someone’s mom outrunning the weightless claymation noonnight. Praying for patient doom. Tasting like Cool Ranch Doritos and a room of one’s own. Sullen minstrel cuddling the spotlight won’t you put down your phone and tell me what’s really the matter. Why won’t they call security before she hurls another chair. Their spectacle protects them from sorrow and all sorts of water rots in Chicago and no one seems outraged when the mother’s boyfriend is her daughter’s babyfather     no one turns down the complimentary coffee and hamburgers     or stabs him in the groin.     By default, by heroic shamelessness.     Did you spend at least eight and a half minutes in daylight.     Did you radiate like starch in the Paleolithic age, get so thin it aches. Is the rebel wanted dead or alive? I had asked Diana. She had gone into hiding by then.
~~~
Because Yosemite’s high altitude lake’s              tadpoles wash up in                         glow-in-the-dark condoms             and every fish lip has a hook in it. Because                              there’s bird shit                             in the clouds. Things catch, get caught.                                         Things are consumed.                              There’s no looking                                        back. And so you                                        were conceived here, Ezekiel, fifty                              feet off the Trail of                         Broken Ankles. We wanted                   to make sure no one                              would see. The one hiker                                         who saw looked away.                                          Amino acids                                         of the flushed cheek. Dirge                                                    for eyeless things. I washed                                                   my body in the river                                                              and the river went numb—                                                   the mind sunburned.                                                    I imagine the second                                                   before you took, before                                                       the cells began to split,                                                   before that flint                                                   was struck, before the dna                                                             began to twist,                                         that a colorless emptiness                           suddenly inverted                    and told the world that he, too,                                        once had a mother.                                          But there is no nest of leaves. Nothing                                         stops. The clock in the glacier                                         still ticks above us                              and on our skin                   there were enormous ants, the segments                               of their bodies                                 like black droplets of paint                                                pushed very close against each other                                                      but still not touching, yet                                                      taking their work with them—                                                      taking away their dirt world.
~~~
She came home running
       back to the mothering blackness   
       deep in the smothering blackness
white tears icicle gold plains of her face   
       She came home running
She came down creeping
       here to the black arms waiting
       now to the warm heart waiting
rime of alien dreams befrosts her rich brown face   
       She came down creeping
She came home blameless
       black yet as Hagar’s daughter
       tall as was Sheba’s daughter
threats of northern winds die on the desert’s face   
       She came home blameless
~~~
The bad mother wakes from dreams
of imperfection trying to be perfection.
All night she’s engineered a train
too heavy with supplies
to the interior. She fails.
The child she loves
has taken on bad habits, cigarettes
maybe even drugs. She
recognizes lies. You don’t
fool me
~~~
I. Dead ! One of them shot by the sea in the east,
  And one of them shot in the west by the sea.Dead ! both my boys ! When you sit at the feast
  And are wanting a great song for Italy free,
     Let none look at me ! II. Yet I was a poetess only last year,
  And good at my art, for a woman, men said ;But this woman, this, who is agonized here,
  — The east sea and west sea rhyme on in her head
     For ever instead.III. What art can a woman be good at ? Oh, vain !
  What art is she good at, but hurting her breastWith the milk-teeth of babes, and a smile at the pain ?
  Ah boys, how you hurt ! you were strong as you pressed,
     And I proud, by that test.IV. What art's for a woman ? To hold on her knees
  Both darlings ! to feel all their arms round her throat,Cling, strangle a little ! to sew by degrees
  And 'broider the long-clothes and neat little coat ;
     To dream and to doat.V. To teach them ... It stings there ! I made them indeed
  Speak plain the word country. I taught them, no doubt,That a country's a thing men should die for at need.I prated of liberty, rights, and about
     The tyrant cast out.VI. And when their eyes flashed ... O my beautiful eyes ! ...I exulted ; nay, let them go forth at the wheelsOf the guns, and denied not. But then the surprise
  When one sits quite alone ! Then one weeps, then one kneels !
     God, how the house feels !VII. At first, happy news came, in gay letters moiled
  With my kisses, — of camp-life and glory, and howThey both loved me ; and, soon coming home to be spoiled
  In return would fan off every fly from my brow
     With their green laurel-bough.VIII. Then was triumph at Turin : Ancona was free !'
  And some one came out of the cheers in the street,With a face pale as stone, to say something to me.
  My Guido was dead ! I fell down at his feet,
     While they cheered in the street.IX. I bore it ; friends soothed me ; my grief looked sublime
  As the ransom of Italy. One boy remainedTo be leant on and walked with, recalling the time
  When the first grew immortal, while both of us strained
     To the height he had gained.X. And letters still came, shorter, sadder, more strong,
  Writ now but in one hand, I was not to faint, —One loved me for two — would be with me ere long :
  And Viva l' Italia ! — he died for, our saint,
     Who forbids our complaint."XI. My Nanni would add, he was safe, and aware
  Of a presence that turned off the balls, — was imprestIt was Guido himself, who knew what I could bear,
  And how 'twas impossible, quite dispossessed,
     To live on for the rest."XII. On which, without pause, up the telegraph line
  Swept smoothly the next news from Gaeta : — Shot.Tell his mother. Ah, ah,  his, '  their ' mother, — not  mine, '
  No voice says "My mother" again to me. What !
     You think Guido forgot ?XIII. Are souls straight so happy that, dizzy with Heaven,
  They drop earth's affections, conceive not of woe ?I think not. Themselves were too lately forgiven
  Through THAT Love and Sorrow which reconciled so
     The Above and Below.XIV. O Christ of the five wounds, who look'dst through the dark
  To the face of Thy mother ! consider, I pray,How we common mothers stand desolate, mark,
  Whose sons, not being Christs, die with eyes turned away,
     And no last word to say !XV. Both boys dead ? but that's out of nature. We all
  Have been patriots, yet each house must always keep one.'Twere imbecile, hewing out roads to a wall ;
  And, when Italy 's made, for what end is it done
     If we have not a son ?XVI. Ah, ah, ah ! when Gaeta's taken, what then ?
  When the fair wicked queen sits no more at her sportOf the fire-balls of death crashing souls out of men ?
  When the guns of Cavalli with final retort
     Have cut the game short ?XVII. When Venice and Rome keep their new jubilee,
  When your flag takes all heaven for its white, green, and red,When you have your country from mountain to sea,
  When King Victor has Italy's crown on his head,
     (And I have my Dead) —XVIII. What then ? Do not mock me. Ah, ring your bells low,
  And burn your lights faintly ! My country is there,Above the star pricked by the last peak of snow :
  My Italy 's THERE, with my brave civic Pair,
     To disfranchise despair !XIX. Forgive me. Some women bear children in strength,
  And bite back the cry of their pain in self-scorn ;But the birth-pangs of nations will wring us at length
  Into wail such as this — and we sit on forlorn
     When the man-child is born.XX. Dead ! One of them shot by the sea in the east,
  And one of them shot in the west by the sea.Both ! both my boys ! If in keeping the feast
  You want a great song for your Italy free,
     Let none look at me !
~~~
You never asked to be a master
and God knows (if She would only say so)
that I never asked to be a slave.
Position papers, grocery lists
rain down like ticker-tape on my long-march procession
past where you cheer me on,
waving from the wistful side of—let's admit it—
barricades.
You're tired of living without any joy.
You think you're going crazy.
You need my friendship.
You're afraid to demand the right
to be afraid.
You're trying very hard.
I know that, and you can't imagine
how I wish it were enough.
I need to sleep.
I never asked for this;
you never asked.
Our twenty-five inch son
whimpers in the night
and my breasts hurt until I wake myself
and feed him.
He never asked for anything at all.
We all want just to be a little happy.
Listen, I see an older me, alone
in some room, busy on the telephone
dialing all my terrible truths.
This thing has never let me live
as we both know I might have; yet I see
this thing can cut me down
on some street or podium tomorrow—
or just let me live, alone.
Our child looks back and forth
from your face into mine, and laughs.
You worry about us, wondering if
something within us has broken.
You hold my body as if it were glass
that will cut you.
I'd stop this if I could, believe me, my beloved.
I'm dying of bitterness.
I love your forehead.
Did I ever tell you that?
~~~
She was thinner, with a mannered gauntness   
as she paused just inside the double
glass doors to survey the room, silvery cape   
billowing dramatically behind her. What’s this,
I thought, lifting a hand until
she nodded and started across the parquet;   
that’s when I saw she was dressed all in gray,   
from a kittenish cashmere skirt and cowl
down to the graphite signature of her shoes.   
“Sorry I’m late,” she panted, though   
she wasn’t, sliding into the chair, her cape
tossed off in a shudder of brushed steel.   
We kissed. Then I leaned back to peruse
my blighted child, this wary aristocratic mole.
“How’s business?” I asked, and hazarded   
a motherly smile to keep from crying out:   
Are you content to conduct your life   
as a cliché and, what’s worse,
an anachronism, the brooding artist’s demimonde?   
Near the rue Princesse they had opened
a gallery cum souvenir shop which featured
fuzzy off-color Monets next to his acrylics, no doubt,
plus bearded African drums and the occasional miniature   
gargoyle from Notre Dame the Great Artist had   
carved at breakfast with a pocket knife.
“Tourists love us. The Parisians, of course”—
she blushed—“are amused, though not without   
a certain admiration ...”
                                     The Chateaubriand
arrived on a bone-white plate, smug and absolute   
in its fragrant crust, a black plug steaming
like the heart plucked from the chest of a worthy enemy;   
one touch with her fork sent pink juices streaming.
“Admiration for what?” Wine, a bloody
Pinot Noir, brought color to her cheeks. “Why,   
the aplomb with which we’ve managed
to support our Art”—meaning he’d convinced
her to pose nude for his appalling canvases,   
faintly futuristic landscapes strewn   
with carwrecks and bodies being chewed
by rabid cocker spaniels. “I’d like to come by
the studio,” I ventured, “and see the new stuff.”   
“Yes, if you wish ...” A delicate rebuff
before the warning: “He dresses all
in black now. Me, he drapes in blues and carmine—
and even though I think it’s kinda cute,
in company I tend toward more muted shades.”
She paused and had the grace
to drop her eyes. She did look ravishing,   
spookily insubstantial, a lipstick ghost on tissue,   
or as if one stood on a fifth-floor terrace
peering through a fringe of rain at Paris’   
dreaming chimney pots, each sooty issue   
wobbling skyward in an ecstatic oracular spiral.
“And he never thinks of food. I wish
I didn’t have to plead with him to eat ....” Fruit   
and cheese appeared, arrayed on leaf-green dishes.
I stuck with café crème. “This Camembert’s
so ripe,” she joked, “it’s practically grown hair,”   
mucking a golden glob complete with parsley sprig   
onto a heel of bread. Nothing seemed to fill
her up: She swallowed, sliced into a pear,
speared each tear-shaped lavaliere
and popped the dripping mess into her pretty mouth.   
Nowhere the bright tufted fields, weighted
vines and sun poured down out of the south.   
“But are you happy?” Fearing, I whispered it   
quickly. “What? You know, Mother”—
she bit into the starry rose of a fig—
“one really should try the fruit here.”I’ve lost her, I thought, and called for the bill.
~~~
On a hill overlooking the Rock River my father’s pear tree shimmers, in perfect peace, covered with hundreds of ripe pears with pert tops, plump bottoms,  and long curved leaves. Until the green-haloed tree rose up and sang hello, I had forgotten. . .  He planted it twelve years ago, when he was seventy-three, so that in September he could stroll down  with the sound of the crickets rising and falling around him, and stand, naked to the waist, slightly bent, sucking juice from a ripe pear.
~~~
For months my daughter carried
a dead monarch in a quart mason jar.
To and from school in her backpack,
to her only friend’s house.   At the dinner table
it sat like a guest alongside the pot roast.
She took it to bed, propped by her pillow.
Was it the year her brother was born?
Was this her own too-fragile baby
that had lived—so briefly—in its glassed world?
Or the year she refused to go to her father’s house?
Was this the holding-her-breath girl she became there?
This plump child in her rolled-down socks
I sometimes wanted to haul back inside me
and carry safe again.   What was her fierce
commitment?   I never understood.
We just lived with the dead winged thing
as part of her, as part of us,
weightless in its heavy jar.
~~~
We’d pout. Our mother, brisking off,
urged Darlings! — your vitamins & minerals
dissolve inside with the milk & this-&-that
into instructions rejiggering more
vitamins, minerals, milk & this-&-that
to fizz up & turn into actual you,
or me, or anybody & etc.
Experiment: — you might let drop
capsules & milk into spit in one
another’s cups. Watch, wait;
think, add, stir. I’ll be right back.
One day it quits.
The whole business quits. Imagine that.
~~~
My son lives on the streets.
We don’t see each other much.
Like a mother who puts white lilies
on the headstone of a dead child,
I put money into his bank account,
clothes into E-Z Access storage
and pretend he’s far away—
at a boarding school, or in a foreign country.
Nights, I dream fairy tales about him.
I dream he becomes a prince,
scholar or warrior who rescues me
from sorrow, the way he rescued me
when he was a child and said,
“Mommy, don’t cry,” and brought tea
into the room of his father’s acrimony—
brave, standing tall in the forest
fire of his father’s scorn. I wake
to the empty sound of wind in the trees.
He says he wants to live with me.
I say I can’t live with him—
boy whose words crash like branches in a rain storm.
Nothing can hold him in,
the walls of a house too thin.
Back home, I had seen
the “study-hard-so-you-don’t-become-like-them”
street bums on Mamo Street,
and he’s like them.
These days, in order to catch a glimpse of him,
I circle the city. One day,
I see him on his bike.
People give him wide berth,
the same way birds avoid power lines,
oncoming cars or trees.
I park on a side street.
Wild-eyed, he flies the block
as if in a holding pattern.
Not of my body, not of my hopes,
he homes in on what can’t be given or taken away.
 
~~~
A tang approaches, like the smell of snow.
Illness like a color deepens—
pale gray, thick-in-a-cloak gray, secret coat silk,
and finally the weight of rough pelts heaped on the bed.
 
The last enchantment of the day is tearing pages out of a book.
The paper soft and thin, like falling asleep
(a hand backstage smoothing my hair:
the school friend, Lakamp, became an undertaker)
 
My baby laughs to rip the pages.
Stays by me, does this damage.
The tearing moves like voltage through my own hands.
                Oh mother skimming fever
 
I need him to linger
                are you still happening there, in your body?
 
I just want to lie at the edge of breaking.
 
Yes, I am still backstage, here in my body.
The baby pulls out another page—
leaving him would come this easily.
 
I will bind myself to the thinnest sounds,
the feather coming out of the pillow.
 
Please keep ripping up the words.
Please don’t need anything from me.
 
~~~
I had eight birds hatcht in one nest, Four Cocks were there, and Hens the rest. I nurst them up with pain and care, No cost nor labour did I spare Till at the last they felt their wing, Mounted the Trees and learned to sing. Chief of the Brood then took his flight To Regions far and left me quite. My mournful chirps I after send Till he return, or I do end. Leave not thy nest, thy Dame and Sire, Fly back and sing amidst this Quire. My second bird did take her flight And with her mate flew out of sight. Southward they both their course did bend, And Seasons twain they there did spend, Till after blown by Southern gales They Norward steer’d with filled sails. A prettier bird was no where seen, Along the Beach, among the treen. I have a third of colour white On whom I plac’d no small delight, Coupled with mate loving and true, Hath also bid her Dame adieu. And where Aurora first appears, She now hath percht to spend her years. One to the Academy flew To chat among that learned crew. Ambition moves still in his breast That he might chant above the rest, Striving for more than to do well, That nightingales he might excell. My fifth, whose down is yet scarce gone, Is ‘mongst the shrubs and bushes flown And as his wings increase in strength On higher boughs he’ll perch at length. My other three still with me nest Until they’re grown, then as the rest, Or here or there, they’ll take their flight, As is ordain’d, so shall they light. If birds could weep, then would my tears Let others know what are my fears Lest this my brood some harm should catch And be surpris’d for want of watch Whilst pecking corn and void of care They fall un’wares in Fowler’s snare; Or whilst on trees they sit and sing Some untoward boy at them do fling, Or whilst allur’d with bell and glass The net be spread and caught, alas; Or lest by Lime-twigs they be foil’d; Or by some greedy hawks be spoil’d. O would, my young, ye saw my breast And knew what thoughts there sadly rest. Great was my pain when I you bred, Great was my care when I you fed. Long did I keep you soft and warm And with my wings kept off all harm. My cares are more, and fears, than ever, My throbs such now as ‘fore were never. Alas, my birds, you wisdom want Of perils you are ignorant. Oft times in grass, on trees, in flight, Sore accidents on you may light. O to your safety have an eye, So happy may you live and die. Mean while, my days in tunes I’ll spend Till my weak lays with me shall end. In shady woods I’ll sit and sing And things that past, to mind I’ll bring. Once young and pleasant, as are you, But former toys (no joys) adieu! My age I will not once lament But sing, my time so near is spent, And from the top bough take my flight Into a country beyond sight Where old ones instantly grow young And there with seraphims set song. No seasons cold, nor storms they see But spring lasts to eternity. When each of you shall in your nest Among your young ones take your rest, In chirping languages oft them tell You had a Dame that lov’d you well, That did what could be done for young And nurst you up till you were strong And ‘fore she once would let you fly She shew'd you joy and misery, Taught what was good, and what was ill, What would save life, and what would kill. Thus gone, amongst you I may live, And dead, yet speak and counsel give. Farewell, my birds, farewell, adieu, I happy am, if well with you. 
~~~
 I will do everything you tell me, Mother. I will charm three gold hairs from the demon’s head. I will choke the mouse that gnaws an apple tree’s roots and keep its skin for a glove. To the wolf, I will be pretty and kind and curtsy his crossing of my path.   The forest, vocal   even in its somber tread, rages. A slope ends in a pit of foxes drunk on rotten brambles of berries and the raccoons ransack a rabbit’s unmasked hole. What do they find but a winter’s heap of droppings? A stolen nest, the cracked shell   of another creature’s child.   I imagine this is the rabbit way and I will not stray, Mother, into the forest’s thick, where the trees meet the dark, though I have known misgivings of light as a hot hand that flickers against my neck. The path ends   at a river I must cross. I will wait   for the ferryman to motion me through. Into the waves he etches with his oar a new story: a silent girl runs away, a silent girl is never safe. I will take his oar in my hand. I will learn the boat’s rocking and bring myself back   and forth. To be good   is the hurricane of caution. I will know indecision’s rowing, the water I lap into my lap as he shakes his withered head. Behind me is the forest. Before me the field, a loose run of grass. I stay in the river, Mother, I study escape. 
~~~
Novel unbegun,
half-loaf rising,
lighthouse northward
and anchor south.
 
Lemon to grapefruit,
you sleep-step sidewise,
turnover, pop-up,
tongue in the mouth.
 
~~~
I had a fascination with your dresses — the greens, brocades,
the belted shapes which spoke of you more poignantly
than the photos in their careful frames.
 
Your shoes were their own country, the heels, satins,
the inexplicable mud — I scraped them with small fingernails,
marveling at the gorgeous debris, wishing I had a microscope.
 
I searched your handbags, examined them for signs,
evidence — where you were going, where you had been:
tickets, lipstick, inked hieroglyphics, a broken comb.
 
I even smelled your stockings, sniffing at the crotches
like a dog, frantic for any trace of you, my eyes raking
their length, wondering at ladders, searching for clues.
 
My father came upon me once, cross-legged on the floor,
his sad smile telling me more than any detection —
he took my hand, and closed the door.
~~~
Because a lie is not a lie if the teller
believes it, the way beautiful things
 
reassure us of the world’s wholeness,
of our wholeness, is not quite a lie.
 
Beautiful things believe their own
narrative, the narrative that makes them
 
beautiful. I almost believed it
until the new mother strapped
 
her infant to her chest, opened
the eighth-floor window,
 
and jumped. My daughter tells me,
after her preschool field trip
 
to the Firefighter Museum,
about the elephant mask, its hose
 
like a trunk, and the video of a man
on fire being smothered in blankets.
 
She asks me if she knows anyone
who got dead in a fire, anyone who
 got fired. When will I die? she asks.
When I was a child, I churched
 
my hands, I steepled my hands,
and all the people were inside,
 
each finger a man, a woman,
a child. When I die, will you
 still love me? she asks. The mother
cracked on the pavement—
 
how did the baby live? Look,
he smiles and totters around
 
the apartment eight stories up.
Beautiful things reassure us
 
of the world’s wholeness:
each child sliding down the pole
 
into the fire captain’s arms.
But what’s whole doesn’t sell
 
itself as such: buy this whole apple,
this whole car. Live this whole life.
 
A lie is not a lie if the teller
believes it? Next time the man
 
in the video will not ignite.
The baby will open like a parachute.
 
~~~
We could hear her
knocking down strands of cobweb
from ceilings—sticky filaments,
sacs of eggs—as we woke most mornings
to a worm of discontent.
It lodged beneath the heart,
rubbed our frayed nerves,
gnawed at the gut, spleen,
ovaries. Filth
 
was Mom's first enemy, so each day
began with ritual cleaning: the stab
and sweep of the broom down the dark hall,
over the stained and scratched oak floors.
 
For weeks, she held her dust mop
one-handed, and with the other
cupped a hernia, while she swore
at us kids in that hard voice—a litany of our sins
and failures: sloth,
stupidity, secrecy.
 
We watched her
smash the spiders that ran, herky-jerky,
along the baseboards, while we ran, too.
 
Glaring at each other,
we gathered up the scattered
laundry, our father’s shoes,
his newspapers and tools, our books,
drawings, music, sweatshirts,
and jackets, whatever
we’d left lying around.
 
We were guilty, but good
at evasion. We cultivated
shrewish or obsessive behaviors of our own: my tough
older sister sneered and stalked out of the house
to meet her boyfriend;
my sweet younger sister
trembled and cried, comforted
by one of our many dogs.
I slammed doors, pounded them
with my fists, screamed, “Shut up,
shut up, shut up!” She couldn’t
 
leave us alone. She loved us
too much.
 
Though we were quick, she was
quicker. Her words stung.
 
We must have deserved it.
~~~
One thing I’m not doing in my poems: reporting
on anything that really happened.
 
When I say I’m from New York, Glaswegians say, “Oh, I love Woody
Allen.” They cannot construe how large a state can be. I just happen to
actually be from Manhattan.
 
How impractical, to imagine that a structure like a government would be
responsive to the needs of such a lot of people. Held like in a holding pen.
 
In the early 1990s I saw a yellow Indian drunk in a tattoo parlor in
Seattle. He literally said he could literally see right through me. If he said
it figuratively I took it literally.
 
A lot of people in America do not want regulation from the government.
In principle: our forefathers, our persecution. Ideally we wouldn’t need
industries and individual actions to be regulated. We wouldn’t even need
laws.
 
People, including people who run corporations or work for them, would
just behave responsibly. Corporations would take the responsibility of
personhood seriously.
 
My mother cannot be trusted to restrict me from buying R-rated
videogames at the porn store.
 
My mother struggled to love me—the firstborn had been so tractable—she
still struggles to love me—can she be commanded to love me? Now I see
what those commandments are about. There must be a God.
 
Objectively we could expect that our family members would go out of
their way to behave toward us with extra care, concern, and with love.
 
Sometimes there is a harsh disjunction between what objective perception
would suggest to us we might expect and what really takes place, or
“occurs,” within the framework of what we call “our lives.”
 
I really saw the other day for the first time that my mother did not
naturally take to me—I am not much like her. It would take an effort for
her to understand what matters to me. (Her love will come around.)
 
My own daughter is quite different from me—I think—it’s hard to tell, she
is only five years old. But she looks different—takes after her father, as I
took after mine—and so far her concerns are not my own. She loves pink.
I hate pink. (My love moves faster.)
 
Where would that moral activity come from, to behave responsibly
toward others? Not to overcharge, not to seek loopholes, not to dominate,
not to oppress. Does anyone consciously oppress? I guess some spousal
abuse comes from the pure urge to dominate, and the ire that results when
that domination is resisted, or thwarted . . .
 
But is it a pure urge or is it coming from an inscribed narrative of gendered
hierarchy? Like a man wearing a wife-beater has been told too many times
that his wife is supposed to listen to him and obey him. Now if he can be
told by the government that “My Strength Is Not for Hurting,” a local
billboard campaign, maybe that will ring in his ears when he lifts his fist.
 
If the government doesn’t do it, who will do it? The church used to do
it, and still does. The one time I went to church, with my mother, in
Tennessee, when we were at a family reunion and the whole family had
certain activities, and one of them was “church on Sunday,” I was brought
to tears by the simple goodness of the message that the pastor, or reverend
—minister?—this was a Methodist church—was preaching. It was Father’s
Day, actually, and he talked about how fathers ought to make sure to
spend time with their kids. Turn off the TV, he said, and spend some
time with your kids.
 
I was crying because I am not used to an experience of shared instruction
in goodness. It was very moving to be in a room with real people all
receiving the same instruction.
~~~
First they pulled from the burning a miracle, then a mistake.The Lord will lift them the priest with the griefin his eyes cried. Lord, what blue eyes bound there,what hurling, diving, shining, burning — reason surfaces and sinks, sinks and surfaces.Dawn without sunrise. Gray. Purple.Her Majesty in mourning. Her Majesty the warring. In the doublehouse of  life all this was repeating itself,Naneferkaptah had already himself lived Setne’s story.When the rains began the teams with two-by-foursfound the going treacherous as those in the desert foundthe food wretched. They prayed to the golden serpent on the staffto save them. And the serpent stretched itself tap, tap and became a hymn, white-throated, rising to giveitself up for the good of the chosen ones.Mother I remember the buttons on your dressing gown. So blue and beady-eyed and true, when did I begin To fear them. The world nownot so round with us. Velocitythreatening to meet, to marrydensity at every corner
carrying carrying Who can see
the writing on our foreheads almost wet still Who can see
tap, tap algae bloom beneath the board smoke from the sky Tell me if that is a handif it is human whatwill itspeak
~~~
1. brett returns my mother to the wilderness
I slipped them into my friend’s palm — 
the tiny crucifix, and dove,
from off my mother’s pendant watch — 
and I asked her to walk them up through the brush
toward timberline, and find a place
to hurl them, for safekeeping. Now,
she writes, “I walked up the canyon at dusk,
warm, with a touch of fall blowing down the canyon,
came to an outcrop, above a steep
drop — far below, a seasonal
creek, green willows. I stood on a boulder
and held out my hand. I wished your mother all the
love in the world, and I sent the talismans
flying off the cliff. They were so small,
and the wind was blowing, so I never saw or
heard them land.” My mother is where
I cannot find her, she is gone beyond
recall, she lies in her sterling shapes
light as the most weightless bone in the body, her
stirrup bone, which was ground up
and sown into the sea. I do not know
what a soul is, I think of it
as the smallest, the core, civil right. And she
is wild now with it, she touches and is
touched by no one knows — down, or
droppings of a common nighthawk,
root of bird’s foot fern, antenna of
Hairstreak or Echo Azure, or stepped on by the
huge translucent Jerusalem cricket. There was
something deeply right about
the physical elements — atoms, and cells,
and marrow — of my mother’s body,
when I was young, and now her delicate
insignias receive the direct
touch of the sun, and scatter it,
unseen, all over her home.
 
 2. cross and dove  
I had not wanted them, and I hadn’t known
what to do with them, the minuscule
symbols of my mother’s religion,
I looked for a crack in the stone floor of the
cathedral but could not find one. Then I thought
of the wilderness near Desolation,
and asked my friend to carry them up
to a peak of granite, and let the wind take them. Since
then, it has been as if my mother’s
spirit matter has been returned
into the great bank of matter,
as her marrow had been sifted down into
the ocean. It doesn’t matter, now, if I
ever wanted to disassemble
my mother. The sixteenth-of-an-inch-
across cross, and the silver line drawing
of a dove are cached, somewhere, that is nowhere
to be found. Now I think of the nature of metal, and how
long the soul-dolls of her trust will last in their
spider-egg-sac of roots, needles,
quartz, feathers, dust, snow, shed
claw. Her belief she would have an eternal
life was absolute, I think.
It would not be good to think of my mother
without her God — like a hermit howling in the
moonscape of a desert. Once, when she was old — like an
exquisite child playing a crone
in the school play — we talked about heaven.
She wasn’t sure exactly how, but she
knew her father would be there, and her elder
brother, and her second husband —
maybe it was a heaven for four,
the three men and her. It was so
easy to make my mother happy
in her last years, to tell her that I
could just see her, as a kitten, in God’s
lap, being petted. Her eyes sparkled with more
beams than any other eyes I have seen.
I have sent the tokens of her everlasting being
into the high altitude.
They will shine long after I can sing her — sing what I
perceived through the distorted prisms of my vision.
I don’t know if I saw my mother
or did not see her. Day and night,
her charms will gleam in the brush or stream, will
reflect the mountain light in little
pieces of unreadable language.
~~~
Not rain, but fine mist
falls from my lemon tree,
a balm of droplets in green shadow.
Six years now my mother gone to earth.
This dew, light as footsteps of the dead.
She often walked out here, craned her neck,
considered the fruit, hundreds of globes
in their leathery hides, figuring on
custard and pudding, meringue and
hollandaise.
But her plans didn't work out.
The tree goes on unceasingly—lemons fall
and fold into earth and begin again—
me, I come here as a salve against heat,
come to languish, to let the soft bursts—
essence of citrus, summer's distillate—
drift into my face and settle. Water and gold
brew in the quiet deeps at the far end
of the season. Leaves swallow the body
of light and the breath of water brims over.
My hands cup each other the way hers did.
~~~
When the body wishes to speak, she will
reach into the night and pull back the rapture of  this growing root
which has little faith in the other planets of the universe, knowing
only one, by the bulbs of the feet, their branching of toes. But the feet
have walked with the bones of their ancestors over long trails
leaving behind the roots of forests. They walk on the ghosts
of all that has gone before them, not just plant, but animal, human,
the bones of even the ones who left their horses to drink at the
spring running through earth’s mortal body which has much to tell
about what happened that day.
When the body wishes to speak from the hands, it tells
of  how it pulled children back from death and remembered every detail,
washing the children’s bodies, legs, bellies, the delicate lips of the girl,
the vulnerable testicles of  the son,
the future of my people who brought themselves out of the river
in a spring freeze. That is only part of  the story of  hands
that touched the future.
This all started so simply, just a body with so much to say,
one with the hum of  her own life in a quiet room,
one of the root growing, finding a way through stone,
one not remembering nights with men and guns
nor the ragged clothing and broken bones of my body.
I must go back to the hands, the thumb that makes us human,
but then don’t other creatures use tools and lift what they need,
intelligent all, like the crows here, one making a cast of earth clay
for the broken wing of  the other, remaining
until it healed, then broke the clay and flew away together.
I would do that one day,
but a human can make no claims
better than any other, especially without wings, only hands
that don’t know these lessons.
Still, think of  the willows
made into a fence that began to root and leaf,
then tore off the wires as they grew.
A human does throw off   bonds if  she can, if  she tries, if  it’s possible,
the body so finely a miracle of  its own, created of  the elements
and anything that lived on earth where everything that was
still is.
 
~~~
Where can the dead hope
to stash some part
of themselves, if not in the living?
And so when I had a daughter,
I gave her your name.
She does not use it.
She goes by a silly, other
thing she was called once in fun,
and then often enough
that it stuck. But oh her hideous pill-
eyed toys — to them each, she has given
her given name,
and so it is you
I hear her again and again calling to.
It is your name she shrieks
to the bale-head farmer, the woven
goat, the cop made of buttons and rags.
Your name, to the squat gray
dog on wheels, tipping on its side
as she drags it by a red string.
That dog, always prone
and pulled along, as though constantly
being killed and paraded
through town to make an example.
What did it do — 
Whatever it did, don’t do it.
~~~
You give me the slip between garlic and lilies,   as if this is what comes of my unprotected   loves, of my hands in the sweet earth,   their willful miscegenation of the border bed   where you’re tucked in deep with tulips, too,   like just one more of their heart-freaks:   a fluke diamondine flake, a thin vein gone gold.   Being mine, you’ll grow up a girdled tree, girt   with a ringed-around root, nothing like   the fruitful vine of good wives—one of which   I’ll never be so, my not-love-knot, you may   as well come up instead like a kiss:   the one wind gives to rouse the Japanese maple,   October’s aerialist, its bright aureole   in the last late sun a red mouth, opening.
~~~
On this first dark day of the year
      my daddy was born lo
these eighty-six years ago who now
      has not drawn breath or held
bodily mass for some ten years and still   
      I have not got used to it.
My mind can still form to that chair him   
      whom no chair holds.
Each year on this night on the brink
      of new circumference I stand and gaze
towards him, while roads careen with drunks,   
      and my dad who drank himself
away cannot be found. Daddy, I’m halfway   
      to death myself. The millenium
hurtles towards me, and the boy I bore   
      who bears your fire in his limbs
follows in my wake. Why can you not be   
      reborn all tall to me? If I raise my arms
here in the blind dark, why can you not   
      reach down now to hoist me up?
This heavy carcass I derive from yours is   
      tutelage of love, and yet each year
though older another notch I still cannot stand   
      to reach you, or to emigrate
from the monolithic shadow you left.
~~~
 ¿Sólo una sombra?/Only a Shadow (Ester IV)?, from the series Santos y sombras/ Saints and Shadows, 1993–1994, by Muriel Hasbun 
My daughter gathers the seeds she finds in our desert, calls them
spirits — the spirits are us, she says when I worry those orbs in my fingers
to conjure her birth. The wind’s first thought is to craft those seeds:
vessels when the tree worries she’s not enough of a multiplicity,
that she will burn into the cosmos. The cosmos is no thought, no worry,
more than us, but less than wind, and the wind is only the infinite,
not the body’s death, which is, after all, only a particle, but time formless
as space. This is only if the wind worries at all. The seed doesn’t think
— she is the doubling ambition of a vessel. In the wind, the idea
of the copy is translated by time. We were once that idea. My daughter
collects me in a box marked for spirits where I unsettle the other seeds
begging for wind so that my sound will echo a thousand miles away.
My daughter was the pulse I toss into the wind with the seeds. Particles
of us pass over like whispers from the cosmos, the clatter
the wind makes. I worry birds will take her into themselves,
that she’ll become a fleck of their transience, but this is how we furrow
ourselves into the cosmos, the twine of our breaths into wind, into
carbon, into the tree’s colossal fingers reaching back from under the earth.
~~~
I tie my Hat—I crease my Shawl—Life's little duties do—preciselyAs the very leastWere infinite—to me— —Emily Dickinson, #443



My mother’s mother, widowed very young of her first love, and of that love’s first fruit, moved through her father’s farm, her country tongue and country heart anaesthetized and mute with labor. So her kind was taught to do— “Find work,” she would reply to every grief— and her one dictum, whether false or true, tolled heavy with her passionate belief. Widowed again, with children, in her prime, she spoke so little it was hard to bear so much composure, such a truce with time spent in the lifelong practice of despair. But I recall her floors, scrubbed white as bone, her dishes, and how painfully they shone.
~~~
He thinks when we die we’ll go to China.
Think of it—a Chinese heaven   
where, except for his blond hair,   
the part that belongs to his father,   
everyone will look like him.
China, that blue flower on the map,   
bluer than the sea
his hand must span like a bridge   
to reach it.
An octave away.
I’ve never seen it.
It’s as if I can’t sing that far.
But look—
on the map, this black dot.
Here is where we live,
on the pancake plains
just east of the Rockies,
on the other side of the clouds.
A mile above the sea,
the air is so thin, you can starve on it.   
No bamboo trees
but the alpine equivalent,
reedy aspen with light, fluttering leaves.   
Did a boy in Guangzhou dream of this   
as his last stop?
I’ve heard the trains at night
whistling past our yards,
what we’ve come to own,
the broken fences, the whiny dog, the rattletrap cars.   
It’s still the wild west,
mean and grubby,
the shootouts and fistfights in the back alley.   
With my son the dreamer
and my daughter, who is too young to walk,   
I’ve sat in this spot
and wondered why here?
Why in this short life,
this town, this creek they call a river?
He had never planned to stay,   
the boy who helped to build   
the railroads for a dollar a day.   
He had always meant to go back.   
When did he finally know
that each mile of track led him further away,   
that he would die in his sleep,   
dispossessed,
having seen Gold Mountain,
the icy wind tunneling through it,
these landlocked, makeshift ghost towns?
It must be in the blood,   
this notion of returning.
It skipped two generations, lay fallow,
the garden an unmarked grave.
On a spring sweater day   
it’s as if we remember him.   
I call to the children.   
We can see the mountains   
shimmering blue above the air.
If you look really hard
says my son the dreamer,
leaning out from the laundry’s rigging,   
the work shirts fluttering like sails,   
you can see all the way to heaven.
~~~
We stop at the dry cleaners and the grocery store   and the gas station and the green market and   Hurry up honey, I say, hurry,   as she runs along two or three steps behind me   her blue jacket unzipped and her socks rolled down.   Where do I want her to hurry to? To her grave?   To mine? Where one day she might stand all grown?   Today, when all the errands are finally done, I say to her,   Honey I'm sorry I keep saying Hurry—   you walk ahead of me. You be the mother.   And, Hurry up, she says, over her shoulder, looking    back at me, laughing. Hurry up now darling, she says,   hurry, hurry, taking the house keys from my hands.
~~~
We said she was a negative image of me because of her lightness.She's light and also passage, the glory in my cortex.Daughter, where did you get all that goddess?Her eyes are Neruda's two dark pools at twilight.Sometimes she's a stranger in my home because I hadn't imagined her.Who will her daughter be?She and I are the gradual ebb of my mother's darkness.I unfurl the ribbon of her life, and it's a smooth long hallway, doors flung open.Her surface is a deflection is why.Harm on her, harm on us all.Inside her, my grit and timbre, my reckless.
~~~
his eyelids like a moth’s fringed wings.
Arms flail against the Ninja Turtle sheet
and suddenly-long legs
race time.
 
Awake, he’s a water-leak detector, a recycling ranger
who bans Styrofoam and asks for beeswax
crayons, a renewable resource.
He wants to adopt the Missouri river,
write the president
to make factories stop polluting.
 
They’re old friends, he and George Bush.
He writes and scolds
the president, every month or so,
about the bombing the children of Iraq
(he made his own sign to carry in protest),
about the plight of the California condor and northern gray wolf,
about more shelters and aid for the homeless.
The lion-shaped bulletin board in his room
is covered with pictures and letters from George,
who must be nice,
even if he is a slow learner.
 
Joseph is a mystery fan, owns 54 Nancy Drews.
Nancy’s his friend, along with Jo, Meg, and Amy
and poor Beth, of course, whom he still mourns.
He also reads of knights and wizards, superheroes,
and how to win at Nintendo.
 
The cats and houseplants are his to feed and water
and the sunflower blooming in the driveway’s border
of weeds. He drew our backyard to scale,
using map symbols, sent off to have it declared
an official wildlife refuge, left a good-night
note on my pillow, written in Egyptian hieroglyphs.
 
In my life, I have done one good thing.
~~~
for Asja



In predawn dark, a rat falling from a rafter is a dollop,
wind a whir, and suddenly I'm remembering my mother 
teaching me to bake her hot water sponge cake.
How we whipped the egg whites with the electric mixer
until stiff peaks formed. How she warned me not to allow
a single thread of yolk to taint the white, or the cake
would fail. To fold white into yolk-sugar-flour was slow, 
patient. She let me carve a wedge with the rubber spatula,
drop it to the batter's surface, then lift from the bowl's bottom
up and over the dollop, turning it in. Warned me
never to beat or mix or even stir—the cake would fall. 
Once, dinking around, I stuck a wooden spoon into
the still-whirring beaters, bent the metal, splintered
the spoon into the batter. Once I cut her grandmother's precious
lace for a doll's clothes, and she cried, the savaged pieces
draped across her wrists. So many times I tried to shove
my peasant feet into her dainty pumps, hand into her evening
gloves. One spoon at a time, that first thin layer drawn across
the airy white forming a little hill. Folding only
just enough. The batter growing lighter by increments.
It was mostly space we folded in, taming down
the cloy. It was never so good as then, licked off
the finer, the cake itself, to me, disappointing, layers
smeared with homemade jam, topped with a stiff merengue.
Never so good as then, her instructing, trying to domesticate
my impertinence, teach me a little grace, me resisting,
the sweet on my tongue dissolving so easily
in that state of matter. Never so good as straight from 
the Pyrex bowl. Never so gentle as the slide of batter
into an angel food pan. The rest up to her, what she
created from the baked version, brown on top and bottom. 
Here I am, decades later sitting under the halogen
of a full moon, and that moment, which was many
folded into one, is so pure and specific, the sugar sharp
on my tongue, the spatula pushing as if through 
an undertow. My mother taught me to fold. Never so
sweet as now. We were incorporating lightness
into a deep bowl. As some bird—probably an owl
out hunting—chacks its was across the lawn,
sounding like a key chain, and now the garden sprinkler
comes on, so I know it's 6:00 a.m. There's the first hint
of dawn slow-dissolving one more night. This is a fifty-
year-old love. It's heavy, so I fold in moonlight, the sound
of water spattered on leaves. Dim stars, bright moon—
our lives. The cake imperfect, but finished. 
 
 —12.17.2013
~~~
What woke to war in me those years
When my daughter had first grown into
A solid self-centered self? I’d watch her
Sit at the table—well, not quite sit,
More like stand on one leg while
The other knee hovered just over the chair.
She wouldn't lower herself, as if
There might be a fire, or a great black
Blizzard of waves let loose in the kitchen,
And she'd need to make her escape. No,
She'd trust no one but herself, her own
New lean always jittering legs to carry her—
Where exactly? Where would a child go?
To there. There alone. She'd rest one elbow
On the table—the opposite one to the bent leg
Skimming the solid expensive tasteful chair.
And even though we were together, her eyes
Would go half-dome, shades dropped
Like a screen at some cinema the old aren't
Let into. I thought I'd have more time! I thought
My body would have taken longer going
About the inevitable feat of repelling her,
But now, I could see even in what food
She left untouched, food I'd bought and made
And all but ferried to her lips, I could see
How it smacked of all that had grown slack
And loose in me. Her other arm
Would wave the fork around just above
The surface of the plate, casting about
For the least possible morsel, the tiniest
Grain of unseasoned rice. She'd dip
Into the food like one of those shoddy
Metal claws poised over a valley of rubber
Bouncing balls, the kind that lifts nothing
Or next to nothing and drops it in the chute.
The narrow untouched hips. The shoulders
Still so naïve as to stand squared, erect,
Impervious facing the window open
Onto the darkening dusk.
~~~
Ruffs are optional for trebles in Anglican church choirs.
— Wikipedia



Bored in the balcony reading your novel
hoping it will keep me awake — 
religion was always a blind spot — 
with my Sunday headache waiting for the service
to finish so I can retrieve my little chorister,
no god in us but song, while
pale important teenage Sophia
in blue head chorister ribbon,
face dumpy as a Flemish burgomaster,
bosses littler kids and loves
leading them expressionless
in paired rows from the choir stalls,
holding the processional cross high,
shushing and huffily eyeing them
for babyish disregard of cleanly neatness,
my own chorister dripping orts of tissues
she stows in her sleeves for sniffles,
in the choir room struggles
out of her ruff ringed dark brown inside
from years of child chorister sweat, hair oil, dead skin.
Me: Your other ruff was white and clean!
Her: Sophia said it was too big.
She gave me this one instead. I showed her
it was dirty and tight. She said “deal with it.”
~~~
December 1789



When infant Reason first exerts her sway, And new-formed thoughts their earliest charms display; Then let the growing race employ your care Then guard their opening minds from Folly’s snare; Correct the rising passions of their youth, Teach them each serious, each important truth; Plant heavenly virtue in the tender breast, Destroy each vice that might its growth molest; Point out betimes the course they should pursue; Then with redoubled pleasure shall you view Their reason strengthen as their years increase, Their virtue ripen and their follies cease; Like corn sown early in the fertile soil, The richest harvest shall repay your toil.
~~~
The last string quartet

(Leoš Janáček and Kamila Stösslová)



She reads romances, she spells poorly, she’s full-breasted,   
broad in the beam, matron in a cloche hat,
bulky knee-length skirt, apron, thick calves, white stockings, Mary Janes.
Her heels go click click on the pavement.
She has those dark Gypsy eyes and the wide laugh.
He loves it when she tosses her head like that.
And here she is in long skirt and embroidered blouse, posing   
by her dwarf ornamental orange tree on the balcony:
high pale forehead, stacked dark hair, heavy jaw, bust cleaving forward like a prow.   
And here she is on holiday with her husband the businessman the perpetual traveller   
with the commanding walk and striped tie and blunt mustache.
“Two decidedly Jewish types,” writes Zdenka Janáčková, J’s wife:
they send her, in the last year of the war,   
bread, butter, eggs, semolina flour, geese   
from the husband’s military contacts.
*
“My dear dark dove,” J calls Kamila, “My little one.”   
*
He has taken dictation from every fountain in Hukvaldy,   
where he was born to endless mumbled rosaries of water.   
He notes the gush and prattle of the Fox’s Well
as the beech tree flashes its sleight of leaf, and fox kits hide in the rocks;   
the public fountain, “a fine of ten crowns
on those who fail to replace the cover”:
and when the cover is replaced
the fountain closes her eyes;
the castle fountain, handsome, broad and brimming, but scuttled into pipes
for manor farm, brewery and slaughterhouse
where the stream blurts out in blood;
and the little well hidden through tall grass at Kazničov,   
springing up through the roots of three lime trees, “Helisov’s Well,”
chants the little girl, and he notes that too, the quavering fall   
of the name; and watches water bugs skitter
and green moss, darkling, at the bottom, and shards of sky.   
*
Bread, butter, eggs, semolina flour, geese.
Kamila knows nothing of music, she worries about her dress   
for the première of Jenůfa in Vienna.
She has two little boys, Rudi and Otto.
Otto the baby swims on her hand
and she leans over him, soft as night, one eyebrow tilted up   
as at a dream of which she is hardly aware.   
*
“She was of medium height, dark, curly-haired like a Gypsy woman,”   
writes Zdenka, “with great, black bulging eyes.
The voice was unpleasant, shrill.”   
*
—That once again he saw “her raven hair, all loose,”
and she was barefoot in the house
and she climbed a ladder to pick apricots from the tree   
and she refused the gift of the knitted silver bag
“And your eye has a strange depth, it’s so deep it doesn’t shine.”   
*
Night leans hugely.
He sleeps alone, in his study, upstairs at the Organ School.   
Zdenka sleeps in their villa across the yard.   
*
He who had scrawled
on his cuffs, on envelope scraps, on market paper, in his little pad,   
robins’ trills, girls’ chatter at the railway station,
fox bark, thrush whistle, hen cackle,
kitten mew, bee hum, “the chord of stalagmites covered with hoarfrost,”   
the airy, bell-like patter of fountain spray,
    scored
    in a notebook
    years before Kamila
    in a notebook
    2 A.M. 24 February 1903
    his daughter’s dying   
    words—
    Olga—
    dying, age 21—
    in a notebook—
    “Now I remember that I’m supposed to die”
    (a little string of quarter notes, B and middle C)—
    “What walks we took on the corso”—“We
    should say so much—”
    He tells her,
    “You are the most beautiful among them,” and she smiles,   
    in his notebook she smiles.
    And, down to a G,
    “Something gets lost so well, no one can find it.”
    In a notebook—
    2:45 A.M. 25 February 1903, Olga,
    her light hair spread across the pillow,
    sighs
    “A-y-a,” two drawn out B’s, scrupulously noted by her father,   
    and in the margin,
    “God be with you, my soul.”   
*
What can be assimilated into song?   
*
The rivers of Lachia: the River Lubina
falls from a ridge of the Radhošť Mountain
into an abyss, to seethe of silver, crash of dark;
the Ondřejnice dabbles through the village of Mĕrkovice,
past mossy banks, shallow, beery-blonde, tepid, where goslings swim
dunking for weeds and bugs; and the River Ostravice   
is the color of steel, and smites the wrist with cold:
and all the Lachian rivers run
through cello depths, horn hurtle, foam-spray of glockenspiel,   
clash of cymbals at the smoky inn
where Sofie Harabisová flies from arm to arm
in the glare, smoke, sweat and stamp of feet:
“Where is the poet Šťastný or Professor Batĕk or Mrs. Marie Jungova now?
Gone, all gone, those who took part
that wild summer night, forty-five years ago!”   
*
Kamila reads romances.
“There’s no love just innocent   
friendship. My husband’s   
away all the time he’s always   
got things to do.”   
*
“Your raven hair—
I write these lines so they’ll be read, and yet unread   
because unanswered.
So it’s like a stone falling into water—”
“You’re the star I look for in evening—”   
“I was your shadow—”   
“Even thoughts become flesh—”
in the fountain bubbling up among the lime tree roots,   
mumbling its prayers over and over, tonguing the stones.   
*
Now after the war, no need
for bread, butter, eggs, semolina flour, geese delivered   
by special connection
and Czechoslovakia is free in the Sinfonietta, in the razzle of brass:
“I’m really
an ordinary woman Your heart would stop   
aching if you saw me more.”
There’s Rudi, there’s Otto,
and her husband always dealing in his antiques.
No we cannot attend the première in Prague no we cannot.   
Now after the war.
For that cold: boil three onions with marjoram and lemon peel   
and drink it like tea with sugar.
Your raven hair.
I was your shadow, when you reached for the apricots.   
*
Gut scrapings: the bow scrapes sunlight from that summer day at the spa at Luhačovice   
where she sat on the grass “like an exhausted little bird”:
“Dear Madam, Accept these few roses as a token”
where she sat on the grass, scrape sunlight   
from the inner petals, scrape the dark from   
her pupil, so deep it doesn’t shine.
Madam:
“Silence goes to sleep under every tree.”   
Under the tilt of her shadowed brow.   
His baby son died those years ago
                                                      and Olga’s hair   
spreads wide across the pillow where she sighs.
He sleeps alone   
it’s like a stone   
falling.   
*
Lullaby,
bee swarms,
gut scraping, fracture, a waltz
falters, the schmaltzy tune with raven hair   
whispers, breaks off, and the hand she lets him   
touch, for the first time, she does not draw away   
the first time, “your little hand,”
in eleven years, under the linden boughs.
“That dark Jewess,” writes Zdenka, “I rather   
liked her at first, but I held my position.   
You know how artists are. They have to be   
handled. I would not                                    
                                                                let him go.”   
*
“These letters were written in fire.”
Zdenka must   
                understand:
                                    Kamila is
the Gypsy girl, Káťa Kabanová, the Vixen, Aljeja,
the little hidden well by the lime trees at Kazničov,   
the military fanfare on the promenade,
trumpet, oboe, piccolo squeal
when the Austrians march out, the Empire crashes, and the country is,   
like the high-wire flute notes, finally, free.
Zdenka must acknowledge this:   
          These letters
                     were written in fire.   
*
By now Kamila’s boys have been stuffed into trousers, stiff collars, and neckties.   
They’ve grown leggy, their faces are plump.
It’s a question of tempi slightly retarded, a vertigo   
the viola suffers, following the violins.
Silence goes to sleep under every tree.
The cello drags
gusts of confetti, repetition, emotion is all
repetition
pulled by twisted horsehair   
out of gut.
My dear dark dove, a form of mourning,
that too is a form   
of repetition.
Why don’t you write.
So when, those last days, she has come   
at last, with little Otto, respectably
to visit the upstairs room he has built and furnished for her
in his summer cottage in Hukvaldy,
furnished according to his dream—
“I want to have the painting of those two cherubs, a writing desk, a communal table,
a comfortable bed, perhaps of brass, a wardrobe with mirrored doors, a marble wash-stand,
and four chairs, each from a different part of the world—”   
   (the question is, what can be assimilated   
   into song)
she peels oranges, makes tea,
they shop in the market and play and walk
and August 8, on the walk up the Babí hůra Hill, Otto gets lost in the woods and ravines—
Something gets lost so well, no one can find it—
and Leoš seeks and seeks the child in drenching rain   
as if searching for his own
son
in the woods and ravines
under the wing of her darkly tilting brow
and returns   
fevered.
In a notebook no one writes, no one scores his cough.   
10 August 1928 J consents to go   
to the hospital in Ostrava
pneumonia—deterioration—sedative
      What walks we took on the corso   
             Something gets lost so well   
      So it’s like a stone
      Silence goes to sleep under every tree   
             I was your shadow   
      I burned your letters but I keep                  
                                                                        the ash
No one scored the sleep rattle in Ostrava
12 August 10 A.M. Sunday Kamila at his side,
a heavy woman who spells poorly, broad in the beam,   
with thick knees and white stockings,
who reads romances,
who will die of cancer
seven years later
at 43
and be buried in the Jewish cemetery in Písek.
       “And I kissed you
       And you are sitting beside me and I am happy and at peace   
       In such a way do the days pass for the angels.”
No one scored the sleep rattle Sunday 12 August.   
Only then, by his order,
Zdenka   
is told
and arrives by train.
                                    These letters were written in fire.
~~~
My mother sleeps with the Bible open on her pillow; she reads herself to sleep and wakens startled. She listens for her heart: each breath is shallow.  For years her hands were quick with thread and needle. She used to sew all night when we were little; now she sleeps with the Bible on her pillow  and believes that Jesus understands her sorrow: her children grown, their father frail and brittle; she stitches in her heart, her breathing shallow.  Once she even slept fast, rushed tomorrow, mornings full of sunlight, sons and daughters. Now she sleeps alone with the Bible on her pillow  and wakes alone and feels the house is hollow, though my father in his blue room stirs and mutters; she listens to him breathe: each breath is shallow.  I flutter down the darkened hallway, shadow between their dreams, my mother and my father, asleep in rooms I pass, my breathing shallow. I leave the Bible open on her pillow.
~~~
after Po Chü-i,
for Robert Creeley



We don’t lack people here on the Northern coast,
But they are people one meets, not people one cares for.
So I bundle my daughters into the car
And with my brother poets, go to visit you, brother.
Here come your guests! A swarm of strangers and children;
But the strangers write verses, the children are daughters like yours.
We bed down on mattresses, cots, roll up on the floor:
Outside, burly old fruit trees in mist and rain;
In every room, bundles asleep like larvae.
We waken and count our daughters. Otherwise, nothing happens.
You feed them sweet rolls and melon, drive them all to the zoo;
Patiently, patiently, ever the father, you answer their questions.
Later, we eat again, drink, listen to poems.
Nothing occurs, though we are aware you have three daughters
Who last year had four. But even death becomes part of our ease:
Poems, parenthood, sorrow, all we have learned
From these of tenderness, holds us together
In the center of life, entertaining daughters
By firelight, with cake and songs.
You, my brother, are a good and violent drinker,
Good at reciting short-line or long-line poems.
In time we will lose all our daughters, you and I,
Be temperate, venerable, content to stay in one place,
Sending our messages over the mountains and waters.
~~~
I try not to cast too much shade.
Sin would be
to use the excuse
of her growth in my womb,
to imagine her as a limb of myself.
She is her own tree,
late-winter’s indomitable shoot.
She takes cupfuls of sun.
I stand well clear
as the branches stretch
like flutes playing allegros.
Not for anything
would I poison her
with an act of possession,
conceal her from the woodsman
whose task is to make room for all.
~~~
I. ANCIENT OVERTURE OF HÉ﻿RODIADE
 
The Nurse
 (Incantation)
 
Abolished, and her frightful wing in the tears
Of the basin, abolished, that mirrors forth our fears,
The naked golds lashing the crimson space,
An Aurora—heraldic plumage—has chosen to embrace
Our cinerary tower of sacrifice,
Heavy tomb that a songbird has fled, lone caprice
Of a dawn vainly decked out in ebony plumes…
Ah, mansion this sad, fallen country assumes!
No splashing! the gloomy water, standing still,
No longer visited by snowy quill
Or fabled swan, reflects the bereaving
Of autumn extinguished by its own unleaving,
Of the swan when amidst the cold white tomb
Of its feathers, it buried its head, undone
By the pure diamond of a star, but one
Of long ago, which never even shone.
 
Crime! torture! ancient dawn! bright pyre!
Empurpled sky, complicit in the mire,
And stained-glass windows opening red on carnage.
 
The strange chamber, framed in all the baggage
Of a warlike age, its goldwork dull and faint,
Has yesteryear’s snows instead of its ancient tint;
And its pearl-gray tapestry, useless creases
With the buried eyes of prophetesses
Offering Magi withered fingers. One,
With floral past enwoven on my gown
Bleached in an ivory chest and with a sky
Bestrewn with birds amidst the embroidery
Of tarnished silver, seems a phantom risen,
An aroma, roses, rising from the hidden
Couch, now void, the snuffed-out candle shrouds,
An aroma, over the sachet, of frozen golds,
A drift of flowers unfaithful to the moon
(Though the taper’s quenched, petals still fall from one),
Flowers whose long regrets and stems appear
Drenched in a lonely vase to languish there…
An Aurora dragged her wings in the basin’s tears!
 
Magical shadow with symbolic powers!
A voice from the distant past, an evocation,
Is it not mine prepared for incantation?
In the yellow folds of thought, still unexhumed,
Lingering, and like an antique cloth perfumed,
Spread on a pile of monstrances grown cold,
Through ancient hollows and through stiffened folds
Pierced in the rhythm of the pure lace shroud
Through which the old veiled brightness is allowed
To mount, in desperation, shall arise
(But oh, the distance hidden in those cries!)
The old veiled brightness of a strange gilt-silver,
Of the languishing voice, estranged and unfamiliar:
Will it scatter its gold in an ultimate splendor,
And, in the hour of its agony, render
Itself as the anthem for psalms of petition?
For all are alike in being brought to perdition
By the power of old silence and deepening gloom,
Fated, monotonous, vanquished, undone,
Like the sluggish waters of an ancient pond.
 
Sometimes she sang an incoherent song.
Lamentable sign!
                             the bed of vellum sheets,
Useless and closed–not linen!—vainly waits,
Bereft now of the cherished grammary
That spelled the figured folds of reverie,
The silken tent that harbored memory,
The fragrance of sleeping hair. Were these its treasure?
Cold child, she held within her subtle pleasure,
Shivering with flowers in her walks at dawn,
Or when the pomegranate’s flesh is torn
By wicked night! Alone, the crescent moon
On the iron clockface is a pendulum
Suspending Lucifer: the clepsydra pours
Dark drops in grief upon the stricken hours
As, wounded, each one wanders a dim shade
On undeciphered paths without a guide!
All this the king knows not, whose salary
Has fed so long this agèd breast now dry.
Her father knows it no more than the cruel
Glacier mirroring his arms of steel,
When sprawled on a pile of corpses without coffins
Smelling obscurely of resin, he deafens
With dark silver trumpets the ancient pines!
Will he ever come back from the Cisalpines?
Soon enough! for all is bad dream and foreboding!
On the fingernail raised in the stained glass, according
To the memory of the trumpets, the old sky burns,
And to an envious candle it turns
A finger. And soon, when the sad sun sinks,
It shall pierce through the body of wax till it shrinks!
No sunset, but the red awakening
Of the last day concluding everything
Struggles so sadly that time disappears,
The redness of apocalypse, whose tears
Fall on the child, exiled to her own proud
Heart, as the swan makes its plumage a shroud
For its eyes, the old swan, and is carried away
From the plumage of grief to the eternal highway
Of its hopes, where it looks on the diamonds divine
Of a moribund star, which never more shall shine!
~~~
Jennifer had a tendency to stop in
the street and listen to the neighbors’
problems. She was consoling to them.
Jennifer would look for people in trouble
and offer help, even though
her body was relatively weak, and
she could not carry groceries
for the old people, really.
When the young mothers had issues
they would come to Jennifer because they
knew that Jennifer also had had issues
as a young mother and would listen to them.
Now Jennifer had middle mother issues.
 
 • 
Everything can be illuminated by water
or most things.
The two women in the black of mourning
knelt by the river in exact tandem, and
they spoke softly.
The film, like life itself, had minimal
plot and extraordinary beauty.
The film, like life itself, was
slow and maniacal. And when
we walked the village afterwards
in search of just the right martini
I thought of the same steps I had
taken years earlier in preparation
for mourning, and I was not unhappy.
~~~
The mornings are his,
blue and white
like the tablecloth at breakfast.   
He’s happy in the house,
a sweep of the spoon
brings the birds under his chair.   
He sings and the dishes disappear.
Or holding a crayon like a candle,   
he draws a circle.
It is his hundredth dragonfly.
Calling for more paper,
this one is red-winged
and like the others,
he wills it to fly, simply
by the unformed curve of his signature.
Waterwings he calls them,   
the floats I strap to his arms.   
I wear an apron of concern,   
sweep the morning of birds.   
To the water he returns,   
plunging where it’s cold,
moving and squealing into sunlight.
The water from here seems flecked with gold.
I watch the circles
his small body makes
fan and ripple,
disperse like an echo
into the sum of water, light and air.   
His imprint on the water
has but a brief lifespan,
the flicker of a dragonfly’s delicate wing.
This is sadness, I tell myself,
the morning he chooses to leave his wings behind,   
because he will not remember
that he and beauty were aligned,
skimming across the water, nearly airborne,   
on his first solo flight.
I’ll write “how he could not
contain his delight.”
At the other end,
in another time frame,
he waits for me—
having already outdistanced this body,
the one that slipped from me like a fish,
floating, free of itself.
~~~
The birth isn’t about poetry

It is about screaming pain on a Sunday

Hailing a cab and head racing

To the hospital, now so close to the new apartment

 

I had a baby inside of me

But no one expected it to happen so fast

Or then at least they said they didn’t

Maybe they expected it to happen so fast

All along

 

Alone in the waiting room I shook and shook

And the blood ran down my legs

Later with the magnesium

I thought of the many permutations of the bald head

Pale, pickling fish skin, glowing with scales

 

When she came out, she was dark and full of hair

No blood, but born in the caul

Like the other magical realities of my past accomplishments

When she came out she cried and it sounded like me

But passed me, into her new reality

 

Now 3 weeks later, they say I am still not an erotic object

So I wander the park in the snow with my friend

We light candles and pray to the darkness

We light the park on fire and the police come and find us

 

When they take us to the jail, I say no, it’s not right

I am a mother after all

They say, but where is your baby

And I say, no no, my baby my baby

They say, yes yes, look at your beautiful baby

 

I say, I do, I do

Look, look, and listen

My baby my baby

She’s here
~~~
We set up an assembly line.
I heat the tortillas in manteca 
after Crystal dips them in chile ancho 
and drains them. Niles carries full plates
of hot tortillas to his father,
who rolls them around spoonfuls of filling.
When we’ve finished the hot, greasy work,
I pour the last of the sauce over neat rows
of stuffed tortillas, sprinkle them with cheese,
clean the stove and counters.
The kids help their father rinse plates and pans.
They don’t know this is the last time.
The cheese melts. Crystal
dances to “No More Lonely Nights” on the radio.
Niles and his dad joke and wrestle.
After grace, we sit before steaming plates.
The kids stuff their mouths, insult each other,
and laugh. We can’t avoid their eyes
forever. Their father and I stare
at each other across the table.
~~~
child,
in the august of your life
you come barefoot to me
the blisters of events
having worn through to the
soles of your shoes.
it is not the time
this is not the time
there is no such time
to tell you
that some pains ease away
on the ebb & toll of
themselves.
there is no such dream that
can not fail, nor is hope our
only conquest.
we can stand boldly in burdening places (like earth here)
in our blunderings, our bloomings
our palms, flattened upward or pressed,
an unyielding down.
~~~
The ancients would lift
          a clay spout to your lips—
          water and honey and wine.
I give you milk, softened
         with wine, and swear
you'll never hunger, never
         thirst while I'm alive.
What suffering I can't preclude
         I'll soothe with singing:
My future, for you
not the greenness of a leaf
         but of the leaves on all
         the April branches.
Fire, I give you fuel. I sweat
         and chop the wood.
I tender forever in you
         who begin where I end as if
your body is
         my body, your elegance
         my elegance.
Sustenance, emptiness
         is lack of you, yearning is
the road to where you are.
You are the road, the where,
         the song, the hunger. Child,
I give you sleep, I sing
                                          you there. 
~~~
Therefore, no more recounting of dreams, a routine thing
that bores with expectations of invention, unfiltered
non sequiturs, unusual embraces
only from the practiced
young woman who everyday remembers
being a bride, she is changing behind that white curtain
Leora
fifteen again experiencing
prematurely the pure suckling of a baby
fifteen with a virgin desire for pure suckling
something to do with jasmine
with jasmine tea
existing only without accident
It blooms while Leora sleeps
when she sleeps at night and it is also dark
for the jasmine
four hours
of tea sucking on blossoms, Cestrum nocturnum like
colostrums: the earliest secretions, and then only milk
from mother
—there it is
seven times over
jasmine bath after jasmine bath
till the tea can get no better
highest grade as stasis
all As
gets so boring, ka-put
to the test of innovation
all the right answers
Leora
sees herself mermaid, eel, tiger
fish from waist down
form-fitting skirt of winks
under that bonefish or ladyfish profile: tail fins
already split, caught in transition from legs to fin
hybrid mutant bastard mestizo mulatto masala mule mix mutt
hm/bm/mmmmm
watered down (jasmine bath tea)
spiked (jasmine bath tea)
stands taller on tips of split tail fin
ps: pastiche, salmagundi when all dressed up
Leg and fin share custody
so young men sacrifice only below the belt
to please her
many wounded soldiers
her company
From now on storming the beaches
rocks already aftermath, the breaking of dozens of sphinxes
the taming of sandstone lions and griffins, gargoyles
Leora takes to breast anything capable of sucking
and being filled, no ban on leeches and vipers
that stick out like misplaced overdeveloped hairs
and while in position, her free hand
shaves the heads of Medusa’s children screaming
for more nursing
with her eyes closed, her free handy blade, sharpened
life line
The liquids of history therefore tend to ferment; the beverages for walks down
memory lane therefore become pungent cheeses and wines, the odes
to bitterness and sweetness happen. This is also desirable. Taste depends
on how the glass tilts, how tongue curls.
What’s difficult
is maintaining gaps as gaps. A sustainable nothingness.
But something enters. Sustainable nothingness
looks like a niche.
Ghosts and spirits of what’s been lost. A young woman looks over her shoulder.
Close watching of what’s fading does not mean the change from substance to spirit
would be observed. On the tippy-tips of split tail fin looking over her shoulder
a long line for the nurse, exceptional business, nonstop nursing
and the milk won’t stop, years are at the end of the line.
Pull the plug on a nearby respirator (how on earth?)
        (don’t assume location, location, location)
the substance travels the line
joins the community of electricity, colonies of gigantic storms
on the sun
and appearances in auroras
that the mermaid sits under as under any canopy
nonstop
The spell of the tide tailored to make the one falling under its influence fall more
willingly. It feels nothing like falling at all: Leora describes rehabilitation
Sand sparkles remembering having been alive
only once
Leora’s eyes
sparkle upon contact with crabs and their incredible redness
that ought to teach her something about fire she does not know
with top-heavy ways
of knowing
      (the brain should travel the stations of the body, and one day
       the eyes and navel, when the eyes accompany the brain,
       line up in a row)
                               —then a real reason for revisionDream on 
Accordingly, pureness of the situation milks its own purity
Fantastic and looks disgusting
        (no matter where the eyes are—candidate
         for truth)
but purity is still pure following
such a milking
The mermaid’s pregnancy has to be called immaculate after repeated searches for the
limits. Lost without those. Pure. Last resort and best explanation for birth of a human
baby from a mermaid without a human pelvis or womb. The best xrays
cannot find them. Machines arrive on the beach and leave defective.
Leora
continues nursing
her baby first in line
The milk is pure. It does not need to be pasteurized. Makes                               (empty)
no one ill. Nothing in it allows allergies. The chemistry                                       (empty)
of the milk is pure.                                                                                         (empty)
The molecules of the tabernacle of purity.
              (as if they are empty)                                                                  (nothing is right
                                                                                                                               here)
Law
Flattened out they are like flattened tetrahedrons,
probably are smashed pendulums
now
Leora
blessed
with impossibility of the usual kind of rape
her own brand
jasmine bath after jasmine bath
without legs
she does as much sitting
as anyone who ever sat on a throne
wheelchairs
keep evolving
 
~~~
    Toys and rose               The zoo body zigzags
I think fish too
                                        but I'm a polite
social being, I'm a Ladle Lady or purple
and blue I write green letters and gold
editorials for the Krystal Oxygen Company
I have one hip as far as I can see, that
I see as I write say
                                         white tee-shirts
                                            upsidedown
                                         turn em around
                                           & put them on
                                             your muscles
                                                my angels
                      or
                                   a semi-colon
                                      is blue window
                                           to me
is that a haiku? I fly over San Diego in some one or
another real despair and ask you to comfort me. You
more or less do, you aren't even here
            my best me my worldly me
            my taste of spring my continuance my
            comfort will you comfort me?
I offer you my heart over Tucson
                                                I can't use it
               take it to comfort me
                                                             free
                  me be it take it take it to
                  be it
which apparently you don't or take you help provide
me it I think, that
happens among true people, that poem I was writing
no good poem
                                    but Moment framed the Pleiades
The garnets ring more beautiful the longer you
                                             are waiting for me in them,
                                             where Deity makes me friendly there.
But who put on all the tee-shirts in Hunter's
Point? Well we're all good boys my son said so.
A semi-colon is a semi-precious garnet cluster
telegram; what we love are such depths between all
the messages. Pass the salt; Ladies of the Tang,
bubble of night; this book about Harry Truman is wonderful.
I see the Gulf Moon Rising every night. I'm familiar
with the zonked starfish. I've the sheen on under
the fire-escape railing all streetlight-lit. The
hollow suddenly appeared to enlarge and fill with a
bright light. Wild with the taste of wine it does not
remember the despair of an hour ago, which was true
that is of a true woman. She was somehow hating her
position on the round earth in the dusky sky on a
harsh Sunday. On the ground forgotten flowerlike
firmaments. She addressed in uneloquent hatred
SMUG LIFE
                          the one who soothes one's foolishness the
Great Face Construct who loves you for your kinks child
anyway, the Guru God:
              Oh I will come back a knockout tomorrow
                      Useless to you!
                                        You're not it you smug face
               I'm not doing your yoga not wearing
               Your moondrops using your cream
               Rinse letting you fuck me Exquisite
               Like I was one of the Ones With Brains Too!
               Intelligence in panties with peekaboo
                                                                    holes—
               No I'm coming back raw
               I'm getting drenched in the rain
               It's rain and it's wet I'm soaked I'm
               Chilled and I'm coughing the air's raw
               To my throat, which is raw from
               Coughing, coughing so strong
               Coughing and laughing                          So strong from killing you! 
Etc.
         
                  She didn't kill nothing.
                                                            & I don't get to share
no secrets with the stars. I make chow. I contemplate
semi-colons. I despair as a mother. I scream at that
kid I'm gonna crack open your big walnut if you don't
go to sleep. Theories of grace, that it implies no
surprise no shock. Ukrainians sudden on Sunday speaking
Ukrainian, the cross not Christian but Gracious
                            and when I want to cry or cough violently
it must diffuse back into my embassy; hard, that takes
hard. And if it weren't for you . . . not you smug life
face, but real you. Please play cribbage.
                                 Pass the salt.
                                 Think of a garnet-black cabbage, a
Ukrainian is selling it on 7th Street in honor of our
marriage. A Spanish fan opens in my abdomen
                           I have Spanish dancers in my stomach
         they're my arching striving in dance where it's black
red flowers darken to be huge pleasuring the
                severe, tried Angel who meets transition,
           transport, as abruptly as necessary
                                                  for everyone's are apt
Says the Unassuming Graceful
Whose down-hip-ness
Is that window
The dancers' sensuous flaw
That admits Spring,
Contingent upon our personality
Spring is for the worldly
                                                       just like the HaHa Room
                       Just like dearest rockbottom
                                                                  suddenly gone buoyant
                               
                                 To be black geese to be
                                 strenuous dancers
                                 is not to dignify a passion but to
                                 grip it.
                                        Not saints but always pupils
pupils dilated fully black in full achievement of
gut-feeling. Joy.
 
~~~
the blood-smear across the knuckles:
painless, inexplicable.
once you discover it pain will begin,
in miniature.
never will you learn what caused it.
you forget it.
the telephone answered on the twelfth ring:
silence without breath, cunning, stark.
and then he hangs up.
and you stand there, alone.
then you forget.
and your father's inexplicable visit:
two days' notice, a ten-hour reckless drive.
rains, 80 mph winds, bad luck all the way,
traffic backed up, a broken windshield wiper,
and no stopping him.
clumsy handshakes.How are—?You seem—!How good to —!How long will—?
he must leave in the morning,
must get back.
a gas station two blocks away repairs the wiper.
did he sense death,
and so he raced to us?
did he already guess at his death
behind those nervous fond smiles,
the tumult of memories he had to bear?
nothing we know can explain his visit,
or the new, strange way he moved among us—
touching us, squeezing our arms, smiling.
the visit was an excuse.
the words that surrounded our touching were an excuse.
inexplicable, that the language we invent may be a means
to get us closer, to allow us to touch one another,
and then to back away.
 
~~~
National Portrait Gallery



I have a need to see the painting when no one is looking. The god-
thought if there was such a thing, inconsolable, of Saturday
reaching for Sunday to ride out onto the Indian Ocean like
an argument of starched waves in their coffin-white lace I might
finger as I pass. There are hands in the paintings: raised, pointing,
folded, reaching, reaching    ...    there’s a leporello book intended for
my ex-lover’s breathing, weather balloons like colored severed heads
laughing their way up the sky’s fever-continuing threshold of three
miles withholding this formula for desire. Beside the one body and its
skying figures of speech, night’s impressionist-flecked mask captured
by singing: try to inhale. And again, please. Cough up cadmium twice,
suddenly. Carry the caraway seed page away, fill your sea purse head
with the tiny unborn. Painting, like digging up your garden in the dark,
isn’t spring. Isn’t daddy root, mama bud pullulating for some creation.
Isn’t spring. Isn’t season’s salt measure for your worth. Whoever
told you that lied about what’s to be framed next.
~~~
The woman in the documentary reaches her hands
to the fence      touches her child through an opening
De mis manos      dolor     When I was a child      my mama
drove me to the swap meet on the other side
for a white dress & flowered wreath      my first
Holy Communion      the mamas nursing
on the roadside     selling chicle con sus
manos libres      Abuelo once rode in the casket
of a trunk      He rose again on our side of the border
which crossed Bisabuela’s family      Look
from my balcony      the sleeping sister
volcanoes shaped like breasts     I’ve
thought about leaving      Shoving
a duffel bag & laptop into the car     taking
the dog      But these babies I’ve wanted since
I was a child      That’s what girls do where I grew up
down the road from a landfill in the humid stench
of a beef plant & sugar beets     hulled & boiled
for their sweet white meat      I found an animal in a trap
who’d fought her way through high grasses
wasting to carcass in my own backyard
& I believe you know what a merciful act means
     I don’t know the words for the shame I’ve carried
The woman in the documentary needs papers
to get back to her children     They’d found her
in the hospital      without insurance      la migra
Mama nursed women who’d run through asparagus fields’
crackling heat      bellies full against the barbed wire
they’re still burying like umbilicals      roots on a battlefield
if the child’s a boy or the place where tortillas are made
for a girl      Don’t you dare say desert
The heat is unbearable & I’ve seen
them pulling anchors from legs
cursing bullet shells      In the hospital facing pig barns
& a graveyard      Mama in her scrubs & gloves
pulling newborns      bloodied like suicide wrists      Jars
of coins for the ferryman & La Virgen burning
an altar on my nightstand      Mis manos      Mis hijos
     Whatever fence I’ve erected from that salted curse
in my family’s blood      Release us
The woman on the screen whispers a prayer      Fly usfree as birds      Sin vergüenza I admit the darkness
I’ve swallowed      the hollow inside      Now      who will
unpin our hands      & toward sky      upraise them
~~~
And at the picnic table under the ancient elms, one of my parents turned to me and said: “We hope you end up here,”where the shade relieves the light, where we sit  in some beneficence—and I felt the shape of the finite  after my ether life: the ratio, in all dappling, of dark to bright; and yet how brief my stay would be under the trees, because the voice I’d heard could not cradle me, could no longer keep me in greenery; and I would have to say good-bye again, make my way across the white California sand and back: or am I now creating the helplessness I heard those words express, the psalm torn like a map in my hands?
~~~
(for Douglas, at one)



Archaic, his gestures
hieratic, just like Caesar or Sappho
or Mary’s Jesus or Ann’s Mary or Jane   
Austen once, or me or your mother’s you
the sudden baby surges to his feet   
and sways, head forward, chin high,   
arms akimbo, hands dangling idle,   
elbows up, as if winged.
The features of his face stand out   
amazed, all eyes as his aped posture   
sustains him aloft
                        a step a step a rush   
and he walks,
Young Anyone, his lifted point of view   
far beyond the calendar.
What time is it? Firm in time   
he is out of date—
like a cellarer for altar wines   
tasting many summers in one glass,
or like a grandmother
in whose womb her
granddaughter once
slept in egg inside
grandma’s unborn daughter’s   
folded ovaries.
~~~
In the redcoat she (who is I) was
an angel, dark and bright.
 
Mama chose the drama:
pretty scarlet to subdue the white
walk, a world dumb with snow,
 
patentleather shoes to shine
the path over ice. My
 
father paid the way.
His teeth salt inside the grin.
 
I (who’s she) had a manner
of leaping toward a light
suddenly running into ecstasy
or heat, exquisitely blind
in the body racing inside it-
self. A little fit of imagining.
 
Thin arms, cropped wings,
to hold the bristly branches of fir, and sing-
ing, sisters and brothers itching,
happy from angelhair fine as a strand of cat
hair split six ways and brushed into the skin
to itch and itch again.
We were wild and giddy with gifts.
 
It was then and always as all souls itch and spin
in lit-red coats that float down this narrow vein,
so we spin in O, to someone who loves us
and suffers the world for each turn before a mirror,
quiet as ice, we fall all through at last
here in memory’s tiny Paradise.
~~~
The pure amnesia of her face,
newborn. I looked so far
into her that, for a while,
 
the visual held no memory.
Little by little, I returned
to myself, waking to nurse
 
those first nights in that
familiar room where all
the objects had been altered
 
imperceptibly: the gardenia
blooming in the dark
in the scarred water glass,
 
near the phone my handwriting
illegible, the patterned lamp-
shade angled downward and away
 
from the long mirror where
I stood and looked at
the woman holding her child.
 
Her face kept dissolving
into expressions resembling
my own, but the child’s was pure
 
figurative, resembling no one.
We floated together in the space
a lullaby makes, head to head,
 
half-sleeping. Save it,
my mother would say, meaning
just the opposite. She didn’t
 
want to hear my evidence
against her terrible optimism
for me. And though, despite her,
 
I can redeem, in a pawnshop
sense, almost any bad moment
from my childhood, I see now
 
what she must have intended
for me. I felt it for her, 
watching her as she slept,
 
watching her suck as she
dreamed of sucking, lightheaded
with thirst as my blood flowed
 
suddenly into tissue that
changed it to milk. No matter
that we were alone, there’s a
 
texture that moves between me
and whatever might have injured
us then. Like the curtain’s sheer
 
opacity, it remains drawn
over what view we have of dawn
here in this onetime desert,
 
now green and replenished,
its perfect climate
unthreatened in memory—
 
though outside, as usual,
the wind blew, the bough bent,
under the eaves, the hummingbird
 
touched once the bloodcolored hourglass,
the feeder, then was gone.
 
~~~
I.
The people who watch me hang my coat
on a peg at the office don't even know
about that other life,
the life when there was you, it,
however briefly. To them my body
is a fact casual as the weather.
I could tell them:
That day it rained
the way it rains in the New World.
Leaves struck the window like daggers.
I didn't think about God
but the ones we used to worship
the ones who want your heart still
beating, who load you with gold
and lure you to sleep
deep in the cenote.
 
II.
A girl, he said, and I nodded
though we couldn't have known.
I would have left him then
for ten thousand pesos.
I don't know what world you inhabit,
swimming there, baby, not-baby,
part of my body, not me,
swept aside like locks of hair
or toenail parings.
It's ten years today
and you who were never alive
pull a face in the leaves
of jacaranda, the only tree
that lives outside my window.
It must be your voice
whistling through the office window,
though I can't understand your words.
Comfort or accusation,
I can't understand your words.
~~~
Try to remember: things go wrong in spite of it all. I listen to our daughters singing in the crackling rows of corn and wonder why I don't love them more. They move like dark birds, small mouths open to the sky and hungry. All afternoon I listen to the highway and watch clouds push down over the hills. I remember your legs, heavy with sleep, lying across mine. I remember when the world was transparent, trembling, all shattering light. I had to grit my teeth against its brilliance. It was nothing like this stillness that makes it difficult to lift my eyes. When I finally do, I see you carrying the girls over the sharp stones of the creek bed. When they pull at my clothes and lean against my arms, I don't know what to do and do nothing.
~~~
WELL, what's the matter ? there's a face
   What ! has it cut a vein ?And is it quite a shocking place ?
   Come, let us look again.I see it bleeds, but never mind
   That tiny little drop ;I don't believe you'll ever find
   That crying makes it stop.'Tis sad indeed to cry at pain,
   For any but a baby ;If that should chance to cut a vein,
   We should not wonder, may be.But such a man as you should try
   To bear a little sorrow :So run along, and wipe your eye,
   'Twill all be well to-morrow.
~~~
The bus steps are high, but William clambers up gamely.
Doors shut. He peers out a print-marked window.
From the street corner, I wave, wistful as a soldier’s bride
as his bus pulls away and turns a corner.
 
At noon the yellow bus returns him
to the same place where I’m standing again.
He thinks I stood there all day, waiting in his absence.
When he finds out I left to play tennis,
 
his forehead crumples like paper in a wastebasket.
Now he knows I can move on my own without him.
Tears drawn from the well of desertion form in his eyes.
I’m his first love and his greatest disappointment.
~~~
I don't want to teach you anything
or show you my wound or have you taste
the amazing thing I made this morning
with only what we had left in the fridge
before you came home with new groceries.
I’m as tired as you are of genius. Hey,
do you know where we put the sky?
I haven’t seen it for months.
When I was in New Mexico last week
all I did was push the baby in her stroller
and worry about the sun on her legs
and think about coming home. Now
I’m home and I’m thinking of the way
the light came in off the runway
while I was waiting in the airport
for the return flight, feeding the baby
a hundred Cheerios, one by one, thinking,
I don’t even know how to visit New Mexico
anymore, thinking, I guess there isn’t going to be
a time when I live like I lived that summer
in Santa Fe, that summer-into-fall
I’ve for so long told myself I will someday
return to, that place I’ve kept, that ace
in the hole, that life with mornings
and afternoons that I am still holding back
with the very tip of my fingernail. After all,
this afternoon is the afternoon I’ve been
waiting for all my life: running
the vacuum over the rugs while you walk
the baby around the block and my breasts
heat and tingle as they fill again with milk
and someone with the wrong number
calls my cell again and again, refusing
to take there is no Phillip here for an answer.
This is, after all, the exact life I take with me
to bed each night, digging deeper and deeper
into its blood-dark soil, waking some mornings
from dreams that shake me and leave me
with a thirst for the past or the future,
a distance I can never reach—dreams
of a house I don’t recognize but know
I have lived in all my life, someone
I’ve never seen saying, Reach underyour shoulder blade and feel with your fingersthe place where I pierced you. Oh,
that summer: Why did I have to leave it
cracked open behind me as I went? How
did I even do that? How did I get that
one sky to stay wedged there, blue as the sky
and just as big?
~~~
for Spalding Gray



The West and North winds both lover us, wanting, bitter,
to bring us in close in the small hold.
Tongues loll and laze, while the flap
and snapping above: crazy wanderlust.
The basin must cradle, keep her passengers,
though the hero abandoned the ferry for the real sea.
Is nothing worthy?
        Wallet on bench. Wallet at home. Wallet at rest.
The child, even his cries, must the ship balance,
makes me wild to right this unhumanly keeling.
I have six arms, am the dismembered figurehead,
ballast, breasts covered in blue scales.
I am at rudder, at bow, at mast, at rigging,
at deck, at halyard, at stern, when the hold
explodes with screaming.
One boy has stolen the other’s marble. The boat shifts, tilts.
A wallet washes up against us.
Is this what you meant when you said a family steadied you?
Is this what they see when they see me and my six handless arms,
shining torso and cuspid humor?
The figurehead has no need for eyelids, muston-guard, vigil, dry eyed.
But she dreams. Dreams.
The sail, its fine apparel, its linen long-shadow: a tiny hand
opening, budlike
~~~
We who must act as handmaidens
To our own goddess, turn too fast,
Trip on our hems, to glimpse the muse
Gliding below her lake or sea,
Are left, long-staring after her,
Narcissists by necessity;
Or water-carriers of our young
Till waters burst, and white streams flow
Artesian, from the lifted breast:
Cupbearers then, to tiny gods,
Imperious table-pounders, who
Are final arbiters of thirst.
Fasten the blouse, and mount the steps
From kitchen taps to Royal Barge,
Assume the trident, don the crown,
Command the Water Music now
That men bestow on Virgin Queens;
Or goddessing above the waist,
Appear as swan on Thames or Charles
Where iridescent foam conceals
The paddle-stroke beneath the glide:
Immortal feathers preened in poems!
Not our true, intimate nature, stained
By labor, and the casual tide.
Masters of civilization, you
Who moved to riverbank from cave,
Putting up tents, and deities,
Though every rivulet wander through
The final, unpolluted glades
To cinder-bank and culvert-lip,
And all the pretty chatterers
Still round the pebbles as they pass
Lightly over their watercourse,
And even the calm rivers flow,
We have, while springs and skies renew,
Dry wells, dead seas, and lingering drouth.
Water itself is not enough.
Harness her turbulence to work
For man: fill his reflecting pools.
Drained for his cofferdams, or stored
In reservoirs for his personal use:
Turn switches! Let the fountains play!
And yet these buccaneers still kneel
Trembling at the water's verge:
“Cool River-Goddess, sweet ravine,
Spirit of pool and shade, inspire!”
So he needs poultice for his flesh.
So he needs water for his fire.
We rose in mists and died in clouds
Or sank below the trammeled soil
To silent conduits underground,
Joining the blindfish, and the mole.
A gleam of silver in the shale:
Lost murmur! Subterranean moan!
So flows in dark caves, dries away,
What would have brimmed from bank to bank,
Kissing the fields you turned to stone,
Under the boughs your axes broke.
And you blame streams for thinning out,
plundered by man’s insatiate want?
Rejoice when a faint music rises
Out of a brackish clump of weeds,
Out of the marsh at ocean-side,
Out of the oil-stained river’s gleam,
By the long causeways and gray piers
Your civilizing lusts have made.
Discover the deserted beach
Where ghosts of curlews safely wade:
Here the warm shallows lave your feet
Like tawny hair of magdalens.
Here, if you care, and lie full-length,
Is water deep enough to drown.
~~~
Of course we failed, by succeeding.
The fiery cherub becomes his smothering.
A greedy heart dives into a dream
Of power or truth, and wakes up middle-aged
In some committee room.
It is eating paper instead of God.
We two are one, my bird, this is a wedding.
 
When love was war, you swore you’d burn
Your life and die at thirty-five. I said good riddance,
Bright hairy boy, I will beat you, down,
Tear you to monkey shreds, survive like earth,
Owl-eyed, because I wanted to see everything
Black and permanent and kill you with your theories.
We used to wake up sweaty and entangled.
 
Thirty, home, and work. We cohabit in a functioning machine.
There is violence, somewhere else. Do we wish this? It occurs,
The flayed combatant, the dismembered child,
The instruments in the basement. We must wish it. See,
Between us is peace, our babies are plump,
I know you, I caress you, I fail you. My faith adheres
In nothing. Don’t leave me, don’t leave me.
 
~~~
In payment for those mornings at the mirror while,
                        at her
            expense, I’d started my late learning in Applied
French Braids, for all
                        the mornings afterward of Hush
            and Just stand still,
to make some small amends for every reg-
                        iment-
            ed bathtime and short-shrifted goodnight kiss,
I did as I was told for once,
                        gave up
            my map, let Emma lead us through the woods
“by instinct,” as the drunkard knew
                        the natural
            prince. We had no towels, we had
no “bathing costumes,” as the children’s novels
                        call them here, and I
            am summer’s dullest hand at un-
premeditated moves. But when
                        the coppice of sheltering boxwood
            disclosed its path and posted
rules, our wonted bows to seemliness seemed
                        poor excuse.
            The ladies in their lumpy variety lay
on their public half-acre of lawn,
                        the water
            lay in dappled shade, while Emma
in her underwear and I
                        in an ill-
            fitting borrowed suit availed us of
the breast stroke and a modified
                        crawl.
            She’s eight now. She will rather
die than do this in a year or two
                        and lobbies,
            even as we swim, to be allowed to cut
her hair. I do, dear girl, I will
                        give up
            this honey-colored metric of augmented
thirds, but not (shall we climb
                        on the raft
            for a while?) not yet.
~~~
When she comes back, from college, I will see
the skin of her upper arms, cool,
matte, glossy. She will hug me, my old
soupy chest against her breasts,
I will smell her hair! She will sleep in this apartment,
her sleep like an untamed, good object,
like a soul in a body. She came into my life the
second great arrival, after him, fresh
from the other world—which lay, from within him,
within me. Those nights, I fed her to sleep,
week after week, the moon rising,
and setting, and waxing—whirling, over the months,
in a slow blur, around our planet.
Now she doesn’t need love like that, she has
had it. She will walk in glowing, we will talk,
and then, when she’s fast asleep, I’ll exult
to have her in that room again,
behind that door! As a child, I caught
bees, by the wings, and held them, some seconds,
looked into their wild faces,
listened to them sing, then tossed them back
into the air—I remember the moment the
arc of my toss swerved, and they entered
the corrected curve of their departure.
~~~
for Hannah




The way my daughter sleeps it’s as if she’s talking
to the dead. Now she is one. I watch her eyes roll
backwards in her head, her senses fold
 
one by one, and then her breathing quiets to a beat.
Every night she fights this silent way of being
with all the whining ammunition that she has.
 
She wins a tired story, a smothered song, the small
and willful links to life that carry her away.
Welcome to the Egyptian burial. She’s gone to Hades
 
with her stuffed animals. When she wakes,
the sad circles disappeared, she blinks
before she knows me. I have listened
 
to one million breaths of her. And every night
my body seizes when she leaves to go
where I am not, and yet every night I urge her, go.
~~~
Now I know that I’ve never described
anything, not one single thing, not
the flesh of the avocado which darkens
so quickly, though if you scrape
what’s been exposed to the air it’s new-green
beneath like nothing ever happened.
I want to describe this evening, though
it’s not spectacular. The baby babbling
in the other room over the din
and whistle of a football game, and now
the dog just outside the door, scratching,
rattling the tags on her collar, the car
going by, far away but loud, a car without
a muffler, and the sound of the baby
returning again, pleasure and weight.
I want to describe the baby. I want to describe
the baby for many hours to anyone
who wishes to hear me. My feelings for her
take me so far inside myself I can see the pure
holiness in motherhood, and it makes me
burn with success and fear, the hole her
coming has left open, widening. Last night
we fed her some of the avocado I’ve just
finished eating while writing this poem.
Her first food. I thought my heart might burst,
knowing she would no longer be made
entirely of me, flesh of my flesh. Startled
in her amusing way by the idea of eating,
she tried to take it in, but her mouth
pushed it out. And my heart did burst. 
~~~
The child I left your class to have   
Later had a habit of sleeping   
With her arms around a globe
She’d unscrewed, dropped, and dented.
I always felt she could possess it,   
The pink countries and the mauve
And the ocean which got to keep its blue.
Coming from the Southern Hemisphere to teach,   
Which you had never had to do, you took
A bare-walled room, alone, its northern   
Windowscapes as gray as walls.
To decorate, you’d only brought a black madonna.
I thought you must have skipped summer that year,   
Southern winter, southern spring, then north
For winter over again. Still, it pleased you
To take credit for introducing us,
And later to bring our daughter a small flipbook
Of partners dancing, and a ring   
With a secret whistle. —All are
Broken now like her globe, but she remembers   
Them as I recall the black madonna   
Facing you across the room so that   
In a way you had the dark fertile life   
You were always giving gifts to.   
Your smaller admirer off to school,   
I take the globe and roll it away: where   
On it now is someone like you?
~~~
The dad. body has just enough gravy on his plate
 to sop up one piece of bread. So, enough for one supper, says the mom. She comes back to him, says don’t argue with mom, you’re a ghost. There’s enough
water around to drown a cob in its husk. in a dad. He puts  up weather stripping all night. to keep out the mom. He says I should have cooked for you more. She thinks she could
make her own insulin. to keep from going into dad.  She says I should have married a ghost. says: You have a little raisin on your lip. a little. The mom says
stop all that quiet, it’s foolish. Come on now, dad. come to ghost.  says the ghost. I won’t even warn the mom. I won’t even flinch if the ghost
tries to hold her mom. After all, a good séance starts with enough food
and a mom. The ghost with a biscuit in meat. The mom with the smell of cracked dad. sucked out of oxygen.
The mom is a smell of wrecked vines. You, the dad. with no teeth. And no, (the mom)  is a garden full of ghost. No. says the dad: lost in ashes. No city is complete. its own worst ghost. who can’t
remember the ghost now, the ghost says: All your selves know, now.  They ghost like the bushel of a snowflower. Everyone is dead. now. says, the ghost.
The mom is a yard of blackening petals. At night, I have really long dads. Without the ghosts,
I wake in a puddle of ghost. But you’ll be mom one day. to know I am alive. We are all sappy dad, aren’t we. Tell the ghost, it’s ok.
Let the bodies lie ghost for a while. I mom of you. I mom of you a lot.
~~~
The fingers lie in the lap,
separate, lonely, as in the field
the separate blades of grass
shrivel or grow tall.
~~~
Remember after work you grabbed our skateboard,
crouched like a surfer, wingtips over the edge;
wheels clacketing down the pocked macadam,
you veered almost straight into the neighbor's hedge?
We ran after you laughing, shouting, Wait!
Or that August night you swept us to the fair?
The tallest person boarding the Ferris wheel,
you rocked our car right when we hit the apex
above the winking midway, to make us squeal.
Next we raced you to the games, shouting, Wait!
At your funeral, relatives and neighbors,
shaking our hands, said, "So young to have died!"
But we've dreamt you're just skating streets away,
striding the fairgrounds toward a wilder ride.
And we're still straggling behind, shouting, Wait—!
~~~
I’m your guide here. In the evening-dark
morning streets, I point and name.
Look, the sycamores, their mottled,
paint-by-number bark. Look, the leaves
rusting and crisping at the edges.
I walk through Schiller Park with you
on my chest. Stars smolder well
into daylight. Look, the pond, the ducks,
the dogs paddling after their prized sticks.
Fall is when the only things you know
because I’ve named them
begin to end. Soon I’ll have another
season to offer you: frost soft
on the window and a porthole
sighed there, ice sleeving the bare
gray branches. The first time you see
something die, you won’t know it might
come back. I’m desperate for you
to love the world because I brought you here.
 
~~~
The pack is filing from my nowheresvillesfilling the halfway hotels, braving the ruts and calling one another via satellite. A dollar says hello.At home I try growinga new life, one of many women bored by my womb’s mystery. Who has time to run a thumb between her legsand calculate the temperature —chipper and bitternetherworld weathergirl.
~~~
You look sleazy tonight
ma said.
Cheap, I said.
I’m doin cheap.
You got any idea
how much it costs
to do cheap these days?
To do gold City of Paris
three-inch platform sandals
and this I. Magnin snake dress?
I’m doin cheap.
You look like a bird, she said
a Halloween bird with red waxed lips.
     —In high school
you could either do cheap or Shakespeare,
college prep or a pointy bra,
ratting a bubble haircut
with a toilet brush.
I was not allowed to do high school cheap;
I did blazers and wool skirts
from the Junior League thrift shop.
In high school it was
don’t walk in the middle of
Richie, Leelee, and the baby,
you might come between them.
You look like a skag
wearin that black-eyed makeup,
people are gunna think you’re cheap.
While I poured red food dye
on my hair
to match my filly’s tail for the rodeo,
ma beat her head against the wall,
she said
tryin to make me nice.
I tried real hard,
but the loggers, the Navy guys,
they always hit on me.
Cause you’re an easy mark, ma said.
And I played guilty,
I played guilty every time.
But now, I said
now I’m doin cheap.
~~~
i. the old marrieds
But why the moon rose so cruelly, neither of them would say.
Though a listless jazz buzzed obediently beneath their day,
and he had seen the hand-in-hands dotting the dim streets.
And she had heard the morning skillet scorch its Mississippi sweets,
its globs of fat. Now, time to be closer — here, on the verge of May.
But why the moon drooped so cruelly, neither ventured to say.ii. kitchenette building
We are soft-caged behind streaked windows, our someday plans
grayed and siphoned flat. “Faith” is simply a church sound, not strong
like “factory,” “scrubbing the chitlins,” or “keeping that man.”
But could faith be a blatant gold blasting through dinner’s fatty fumes,
its perfumed lure tangling with the smell of twice-fried potatoes
and twist-tied bags of reeking rubbish lining the dark hall?
Fluttering beneath florescent sputter, could faith warm our rooms,
even the walls scrubbed raw with Baptist chill? If we let faith in,
had the mind to carve it a space, keep it Sunday clean,
anticipate its slow glories, beg it to begin?
We can’t spare the time faith needs. We don’t have that minute.
Since silly wants like hot water require we be practical now,
we wait and wait on the bathroom, hope the warm stays in it.iii. the mother
Murders will not let you forget.
You remember the children you had — suddenly quarry, target —
the daughters with gunfire smoldering circles in their napped hair,
the absent sons whose screams still ride the air.
You knew the ways of bullets, prayed your child run, outrun, beat
them in their race toward the heart of your baby, your sweet.
You imagine another child cocking the hammer with his thumb,
or blazing the blade forward, harkening the dark that will overcome
you. Never again will you look at a bright, upturned face and sigh,
returning again and again to drown your baby in the mama-eye.
I hear on Kilbourn, on Christiana, the not-there of my children.
I have pushed them flail and wriggle from my tired body, eased
my babies into a world of growl and gun. The breath-suck,
I wailed and prayed, my loves, as rougher mothers seized
you. Now I am newly barren, drained of mother luck,
and you are suddenly far beyond my futile reach.
If I let these frantic streets deny the tender in your names,
if I relinquished you to this city and its unrelenting games,
your end is all I own. If I dared let others govern your deaths,
if I wasn’t there to mourn your final blurring breaths,
believe that my loss of you to this was not deliberate.
Though I have no right to whine,
whine that none of the blame was mine,
since, in every world I’m rooted in, you are dead.
Or rather, or instead,
you are so much a hollow of the children I made.
But now you are scar on the pavement. I am afraid —
is that the you there is now, how the story of you will be said?
You were born — a gunshot, a swift blade — then you died.
It’s too much this way — even the child who killed you cried.
Believe. I loved you all.
Be. Leave me the sounds of still-thudding hearts. I grieve you
All.iv. a song in the back yard
I’ve wallowed in the back yard all my life.
I want to slide ’round front
Where it’s gold-splashed and guarded and spined fragrance grows.
A girl gets a craving for rose.
I want to go in the front yard now
and far away from these nappy weeds — this alley
too. I wanna see where the well-off children play.
I want some proper fun today.
They do some miracle things.
They have that secret kinda fun.
My daddy says They’re uppity, but I think it’s fine
how they’re tucked in their beds by a quarter to nine.
My mama, with her country ways, try as she may,
will never turn me into a weeds and wildflowers woman,
that’s a fact. I only stay up late
on account of all her party folk flooding our back gate.
But that’s OK. I think front yard folk are perfect. Really, I do.
And I’m gonna be a righteous woman, too.
And wear a soft cardigan, cashmere trimmed in lace.
And stroll ’round all of Lawndale with this righteous on my face.
~~~
1. Falmouth, Massachusetts, 1972
 
Oak table, knotted legs, the chirp
And scrape of tines to mouth.
Four children, four engines
Of want. That music.
 
What did your hand mean to smooth
Across the casket of your belly?
What echoed there, if not me—tiny body
Afloat, akimbo, awake or at rest?
 
Every night you fed the others
Bread leavened with the grains
Of your own want. How
Could you stand me near you,
 
In you, jump and kick tricking
The heart, when what you prayed for
Was my father’s shadow, your name
In his dangerous script, an envelope
 
Smelling of gun-powder, bay rum,
Someone to wrestle, sing to, question,
Climb?
 
 
                        2. Interstate 101 South, California, 1981
 
Remember the radio, the Coca-Cola sign
Phosphorescent to the left, bridge
After bridge, as though our lives were
Engineered simply to go? And so we went
 
Into those few quiet hours
Alone together in the dark, my arm
On the rest beside yours, our lights
Pricking at fog, tugging us patiently
 
Forward like a needle through gauze.
Night held us like a house.
Sometimes an old song
Would fill the car like a ghost.
 
                                    3. Leroy, Alabama, 2005
 
There’s still a pond behind your mother’s old house,
Still a stable with horses, a tractor rusted and stuck
Like a trophy in mud. And the red house you might
Have thrown stones at still stands on stilts up the dirt road.
 
A girl from the next town over rides in to lend us
Her colt, cries when one of us kicks it with spurs.
Her father wants to buy her a trailer, let her try her luck
In the shows. They stay for dinner under the tent
 
Your brother put up for the Fourth. Firebugs flare
And vanish. I am trying to let go of something.
My heart cluttered with names that mean nothing.
Our racket races out to the darkest part of the night.
 
The woods catch it and send it back.
 
 
                        4. But let’s say you’re alive again—
 
Your hands are long and tell your age.
You hold them there, twirling a bent straw,
And my reflection watches, hollow-faced,
Not trying to hide. The waiters make it seem
 
Like Cairo. Back and forth shouting
That sharp language. And for the first time
I tell you everything. No shame
In my secrets, shoddy as laundry.
 
I have praised your God
For the blessing of the body, snuck
From pleasure to pleasure, lying for it,
Holding it like a coin or a key in my fist.
 
I know now you’ve known all along.
 
I won’t change. I want to give
Everything away. To wander forever.
Here is a pot of tea. Let’s share it
Slowly, like sisters.
~~~
My child is sitting cross-legged on the floor reading to herself.
Sometimes she is so full of need I push her to the floor.
Only once I did that and I don’t even remember the moment
right, but I was trying to wipe urine off my leg and she was
naughty like a squirrel and jumping and singing and her head
slammed into my chin, which hurt and even more than that,
it pissed me off, because she’s my beautiful child, but in that
button snap of a moment she was suddenly just one more person
and I pushed her away in a way that felt to me like setting her
down, but awkwardly, because of how she was also balancing
her feet on my feet as I tried to pour out a bowl of pee
from her little potty as a toothbrush dangled foaming
from my mouth. Somewhere in the mess of that morning
she’d become person enough to, in the space between us,
create force of momentum, and then I did not set her down,
but pushed her and she fell away from it against the wall
and was crying because I, her mommy, pushed her. And I know
this should be the poem about how I’m horrified at myself,
the poem about what in ourselves we have to live with,
but in that moment which followed two years of breastfeeding
and baby-wearing and sixty-nine hours of natural childbirth
and the hemorrhaging and the uncertain operation, after which
I pumped every two hours, careful not to let the cord tangle
in the IV. Even then when she cried and no matter what
and no matter and no matter and no matter and no matter what,
I held her all night if she cried so she would not ever know
someday you’ll cry alone, but I held her and ached and leaked
and bled too as long as it took. Of course there’ve been nights
since but sometimes it feels as if I’ve never been asleep again,
so when I say I pushed my two-year-old against a wall and I don’t
remember it happening that way but it happened and I did
and I’ve been wondering a long time now what the limit is
and when I would find the end of myself, and that day, which
was yesterday, was the end. And this day, when we played
hide-and-seek with Daddy, and touched bugs, and readFrog and Toad Are Friends twice together before she read it
to herself as I wrote this, this is the day that comes after.
~~~
(Independence Day, 1964)



On her 36th birthday, Thomas had shown her
her first swimming pool. It had been
his favorite color, exactly—just
so much of it, the swimmers’ white arms jutting
into the chevrons of high society.
She had rolled up her window
and told him to drive on, fast.
Now this act of mercy: four daughters
dragging her to their husbands’ company picnic,
white families on one side and them
on the other, unpacking the same
squeeze bottles of Heinz, the same
waxy beef patties and Salem potato chip bags.
So he was dead for the first time
on Fourth of July—ten years ago
had been harder, waiting for something to happen,
and ten years before that, the girls
like young horses eyeing the track.
Last August she stood alone for hours
in front of the T.V. set
as a crow’s wing moved slowly through
the white streets of government.
That brave swimming
scared her, like Joanna sayingMother, we’re Afro-Americans now!
What did she know about Africa?
Were there lakes like this one
with a rowboat pushed under the pier?
Or Thomas’ Great Mississippi
with its sullen silks? (There was
the Nile but the Nile belonged
to God.) Where she came from
was the past, 12 miles into town
where nobody had locked their back door,
and Goodyear hadn’t begun to dream of a park
under the company symbol, a white foot
sprouting two small wings.
~~~
“It took the herd six hours,”
the Blue Planet voiceover explains,
orcas pushing a blue whale calf
under. Keet, our son points
at the screen, naming them all
one whale, from the greek kētos,
water-monster, “The seas bathed
in calf’s blood.” More, our son
asks, More okean, watches the red
beneath them spreading, More ocean.
“Killer whales,” the voice reminds,
the blue calf’s heart bigger
than all three of ours, its blood could fill
our son’s bathtub for weeks. The orcas
only eat the head, let the rest sink
to the ocean floor, but no, the voice
points out how body born six thousand pounds
lands on the skeleton of a full grown blue,
“Nothing gets wasted in the water.”Look, our son staring, Look,
learning how the deep devours,
blubber separates from bone,
even bone won’t survive long,
eaten by water worms and salt.
Spicy, our son calls any intense
flavor, tears in his mouth, but no,
not over this, the calf’s
blood or its bones, the orcas
swimming through reddened salt,
but over desire, he wants
what he cannot have
or doesn’t want what he is
given, a calf’s heart
in the teeth of a hungrier mammal,
because what else is worth
that much salt?
 
~~~
You were given feet but had never touched
them to earth. You were given the sea
and you fed upon it for months.
 
So when your head crowned, ashen
with loss of blood from the cord
wound tight around your neck,
 
and when they cut you from me,
and you were silent, and the tide in me
receded, I remembered the shearwaters
 
following the ship—the slow sweep
of them riding the wind’s current.
The stretch of them, hovering,
 
cruciform, shearing the air the way an envelope
slides back into a box of letters, making
its narrow space. I had watched
 
from the stern for hours their trailing:
as if stillness itself drifted toward me.
I thought it was my life.
 
Then someone lifted you up,
and there was a sound,
and they laid you on me, breathing.
 
~~~
Over the still world, a bird calls
waking solitary among black boughs.
You wanted to be born; I let you be born.
When has my grief ever gotten
in the way of your pleasure?
Plunging ahead
into the dark and light at the same time
eager for sensation
as though you were some new thing, wanting
to express yourselves
all brilliance, all vivacity
never thinking
this would cost you anything,
never imagining the sound of my voice
as anything but part of you—
you won't hear it in the other world,
not clearly again,
not in birdcall or human cry,
not the clear sound, only
persistent echoing
in all sound that means good-bye, good-bye—
the one continuous line
that binds us to each other.
~~~
Recall the carousel. Its round and round.Its pink lights blinking off and on. The children’s faces painted garish colors againstan institutional wall. And the genetics. The We won’t be here too long  ...    Do not step off  ...The carousel? Do you recall? As ifwe were our own young parents suffering againafter so many hundreds of hours of bliss. And even the startling fact that what had always been feared might come to pass: A familiar sweater in a garbage can.A surgeon bent over our baby, wearing a mask. But surely you recall how happily and for how longwe watched our pretty hostages go round. They waved at us too many times to count.Their dancing foals. Their lacquered mares. Even a blue-eyed hunting hound was still allowed back then.
~~~
We’re all dreamers; we don’t know who we are.
Some machine made us; machine of the world, the constricting family.
Then back to the world, polished by soft whips.
We dream; we don’t remember.
Machine of the family: dark fur, forests of the mother’s body.
Machine of the mother: white city inside her.
And before that: earth and water.
Moss between rocks, pieces of leaves and grass.
And before, cells in a great darkness.
And before that, the veiled world.
This is why you were born: to silence me.
Cells of my mother and father, it is your turn
to be pivotal, to be the masterpiece.
I improvised; I never remembered.
Now it’s your turn to be driven;
you’re the one who demands to know:
Why do I suffer? Why am I ignorant?
Cells in a great darkness. Some machine made us;
it is your turn to address it, to go back asking
what am I for? What am I for?
~~~
‘Mamma! mamma!’ two eaglets cried, ‘To let us fly you’ve never tried. We want to go outside and play; We’ll promise not to go away.’ The mother wisely shook her head: ‘No, no, my dears. Not yet,’ she said. ‘But, mother dear,’ they called again, ‘We want to see those things called men, And all the world so grand and gay, Papa described the other day. And – don’t you know? – he told you then About a little tiny wren, That flew about so brave and bold, When it was scarcely four weeks old?’ But still the mother shook her head; ‘No, no, my dears, not yet,’ she said. ‘Before you see the world below, Far bigger you will have to grow. There’s time enough to look for men; And as for wrens – a wren’s a wren. What if your freedom does come late? An eaglet can afford to wait.’
~~~
For Ben’s project he must research five facts
about his African-American hero and write them
on poster board. He chooses Harriet Tubman,
whose five facts are: Her father’s name was Ben.Her mother’s name was Old Rit. She was bornin 1820 and died in 1913. She was born in Marylandand died in New York. Ben asks for advice
about his fifth fact and I suggest: She led more than300 people to freedom. Ben sighs the way he does
now and says, Everyone knows that, Mom.
 
So I try to remember the book we read yesterday,
search for the perfect fact, the one that will match
his four facts and satisfy his almost-seven mind.Remember, I ask, she was a spy for the North during the Civil War? It’s a hit! He writes it:Harriet Tubman was a spy for the north during the civil war. It was a war between the northwhich is where the slaves were trying to getand the south which is where they were.Before the war, Abraham Lincoln signed a formthat said All the slaves everywhere are free!which is one of the reasons they were fighting.
 
On summer mornings, Lincoln rode his horse
to work down the Seventh Street Turnpike
close to my new home. Down Georgia Avenue
past The Hunger Stopper and Pay Day 2 Go and liquor
stores and liquor stores. Past Cluck-U-Chicken
and Fish in the ‘Hood and Top Twins Faze II
Authentic African Cuisine and the newish Metro station
and all those possibilities gleaming in developers’ eyes.
 
There goes Lincoln’s horse down Georgia Avenue
from the Soldier’s Home to the White House –
much cooler up here in the country, in the neighborhood,
at the hospital. And there’s Walt Whitman, the sworn poet
of every dauntless rebel the world over, hanging around
his street corner every morning to bow to the president
at Thomas Circle by the homeless guys. It’s 100 years now
since any president summered at the Soldier’s Home.
But I was born only 50 years after Harriet Tubman died,
all the centuries we drag into the next century and the next.
 
Writing here, in my new neighborhood, the city old
and new around me, I see Harriet Tubman
and Lincoln and Uncle Walt and the true stories
and sometimes our own despair like Washington’s
summer malaria, her 40 war hospitals, Whitman moving
from bed to bed, stroking the hair of so many dying boys.
 
North up Georgia Avenue in our own soldiers’ home –
Walter Reed – the boys and now girls too
mourn the ghosts of their own legs and arms
and our capacity for love. Where is their
sworn poet? Harriet Tubman born
so close. All these heroes under our feet.
~~~
I leave her weeping in her barred little bed,  her warm hand clutching at my hand,  but she doesn’t want a kiss, or to hug the dog goodnight—  she keeps crying mommy, uhhh, mommy,  with her lovely crumpled face  like a golden piece of paper I am throwing away.  We have been playing for hours,  and now we need to stop, and she does not want  to. She is counting on me to lower the boom  that is her heavy body, and settle her down.  I rub her ribcage, I arrange the blankets around her hips.  Downstairs are lethal phonecalls I have to answer.  Friends  dying, I need to call.  My daughter may be weeping all my tears,  I only know  that even this young  and lying on her side,  her head uplifted like a cupped tulip,  sometimes she needs to cry.
~~~
When he tells the story now
he's at the center of it,
everyone else in the house
falling into the backdrop—
my mother, grandmother,
an uncle, all dead now—props
in our story: father and daughter
caught in memory's half-light.
I'm too young to recall it,
so his story becomes the story:
1969, Hurricane Camille
bearing down, the old house
shuddering as if it will collapse.
Rain pours into every room
and he has to keep moving,
keep me out of harm's way—
a father's first duty: to protect.
And so, in the story, he does:
I am small in his arms, perhaps
even sleeping. Water is rising
around us and there is no
higher place he can take me
than this, memory forged
in the storm's eye: a girl
clinging to her father. What
can I do but this? Let him
tell it again and again as if
it's always been only us,
and that, when it mattered,
he was the one who saved me.
~~~
So you see why it could not have been a more humble moment.
If there was any outward sign of regalia
It might have been the twilight crowning of the day, just then,
A perfect moment of dusk, but changing, as a wave does
Even as you admire it. Because the southbound stop
Mirrors the one northbound where we so often find ourselves
At the beginning, southbound’s return holds the memory
Of northbound’s setting-out, and the grassy median between
With its undisturbed trees defines an elusive strip of the present
Where no one lives. After twenty-eight years of the trip,
It’s like two beakers of colored water — one green, one blue — 
Have poured themselves back and forth, because
On one side we are tinted by remembering the other.
But this aspect of the journey, at least, we know we will repeat.
As dusk cohered that moment — aquas, pinks, violets — 
Just at that moment as I was returning to the car
A woman came the other way, her two young daughters
Holding her hands, and the gloaming sparkled around them
So that I froze, as they were backlit, starry,
They were the southbound reminder of who I had been beginning
The trip. She didn’t look like me, but what I did recognize
Was her clarity of purpose, in what Sharon Olds calledthe days of great usefulness, making life as nice
As she could for them, always writing the best story,
And also, beneath her skin, living with delight as quiet
As the shoots anchoring grass beneath the earth.
I walked back to my car. My husband sat in the driver’s seat,
Our weekend’s luggage thrown in back.Tell me we really had those girls, I said,and that they held my hands like that. When I got home
I pictured her helping them each into bed — I knew it was
Later than she had hoped — then reading
Each section of the paper’s terrible news, finally alone.
~~~
One morn I left him in his bed; A moment after some one said, ‘Your child is dying – he is dead.’ We made him ready for his rest, Flowers in his hair, and on his breast His little hands together prest. We sailed by night across the sea; So, floating from the world were we, Apart from sympathy, we Three. The wild sea moaned, the black clouds spread Moving shadows on its bed, But one of us lay midship dead. I saw his coffin sliding down The yellow sand in yonder town, Where I put on my sorrow’s crown. And we returned; in this drear place Never to see him face to face, I thrust aside the living race. Mothers, who mourn with me today, Oh, understand me, when I say, I cannot weep, I cannot pray; I gaze upon a hidden store, His books, his toys, the clothes he wore, And cry, ‘Once more, to me, once more!’ Then take, from me, this simple verse, That you may know what I rehearse— A grief – your and my Universe!
~~~
At the Mind Museum, you can walk to the back,step on several large buttons on the ground,and watch parts of the brain light up: the frontal lobefor decision and memory, the temporal lobefor smell and sound, the occipital for sight. I tryto make my toddler son laugh by hoppingfrom one button to the next, watching each lobelight up along the way, but he will not leave the prisonof his melancholy. My son: how he loves to revisitthe most difficult point of conflict in a picture book,or the moment at which his favorite car heavesa difficult sigh at the pinnacle of a movie’s emotionalarc, or the promise of injury if I take a fall. My son,so distant from other children in his sadness.Just the other day, at the pool, he gazedat the boys and girls splashing and shriekingand said, Look. The children are having fun,as if he were an anthropologist in a foreign land.If these are his musings at age two, one can onlyimagine the life that must follow. Through a dark channelhe was born; to darkness he is most drawn. Easierto write than say the guilt I feel for giving himthe sharp pain of melancholy. My son, alwaysin the world without husk or shell, it is as if his heartthrobs on the outside of his body, as if his brainhas no skull to absorb the assaults that strike it.Today, I watch him writhe in the pain of a tantrum —a typical kid, this is what they do, everyone assures me — and usually I rush in, unwittingly increasinghis sense of emergency. Instead, today, I stand back,relinquish the role of skull and skin, watch his mindunfurl like a medieval tapestry. In that momentof my feigned disinterest, his head is no longer headbut battlefield where Wrath wages a fierce waragainst Patience. He is no longer a little boyscreaming on the ground and throwing plastic trucks;instead he is a creature engaged in a struggleto free his enslaved heart from the monsterswhose foaming mouths and hot fumesand clots of foul blood besiege himas he gathers his thoughts from the unraveling of his universe. Prudentius says that fiery Wrathin her frenzy slays herself and diesby her own weapons
~~~
Of all living monuments has the fewestfacts attached to it, they slide right offits surface, no Lincoln lap for them to siton and no horse to be astride. Here is what                                                 I know for sure:Was a gift from one city to another. A citycannot travel to another city, a city cannot visit any city but itself, and in its sadness it gives        away a great door in the air. Well         a city cannot except for Paris, who putson a hat styled with pigeon wings and walksthrough the streets of another city and will noteven see the sights, too full she is of the sightsalready. And within her walk her women,         and the women of Paris looking like         they just walked through an Arch...        Or am I mixing it up I think I am with another famous female statue? Bornin its shadow and shook-foil hot the factsslid off me also. I and the Arch we burnedto the touch. “Don’t touch that Arch a boywe know got third-degree burns from touch-        ing that Arch,” says my mother sittingfor her statue. She is metal on a hilltop andso sad she isn’t a Cross. She was long agogiven to us by Ireland. What an underhand        gift for an elsewhere to give, a door that reminds you you can leave it. She raises        her arm to brush my hair. Oh no femalearmpit lovelier than the armpit of the Arch.
~~~
I Should I take this time, while the children are in school,to untrim the tree? Standing in the dish we let go dry,it looks well-preserved, as if Christmas were stillin our future; would it spare their feelings if I dismantlepiece by piece its grandeur, or will I amplifytheir sense of loss, to de-jewel it without ritual?Epiphany, we drove by a painted camel on a church lawn— or what, after hard freeze, is lawn’s avatar.No magus, Jefferson Davis brought camel brawnto Texas to aid in the Civil War. Now they’re goneexcept in these tableaux where Balthazar,with all his diamonds, kneels before the Paragon.We were coming back from a weekend getawaybefore the holiday’s official end. I took the dog,went out on the beach, but the length of South Padrewas swept by a long wind; dunes went astray;thin snakes of sand grains slithered; I couldn’t jog;the Gulf went from glaucous to cauldron gray.As in a Bedouin poem a gown of white sandeternally receded before me; the snakes raced.The profile of the island was changing, anddespite the fury in my heart this tempest fanned,the beloved’s encampment can never be retraced:all texts are unwritten by the same hand.Boxes of baubles for yearly display we haulfaithfully from house to house no nomad, I realize,could conscion. Your hem’s circumference allyou know of enclosure. The open stall.Patterns are starting to emerge to my wondering eyes — on my skin, even. Up close, the epidermalAlhambra of triangles, stars. Back of wrist. Kneecap.Gypsies that named the lines on palms don’t lookat soles, like yours, that close the lovelorn gapbetween the territory and (yes, yes) the map.Our tree is still in its vise. The road we took(don’t turn) is riddled with needles. Dried sap.II The boys are lighting fireworks on the ground.(Recall, this is a country called Illyria;even stars are upside down.)Toby and Andrew name the kinds of deliria:jumping jack, blooming flower, black cat    ...    What rose-green shower — or umbrella — is that?The empty lot Toby and Andrew bring us towhere crab-like diggers squatinertly in the champagne-cold, is impromptubeach, with all the night sky for sea. Juiced-up Roman candles discharge into it. Loosed,frantic, spinners change color like salamanders:spry Viola jumps back, goosed;but Feste jokes about motley, and gandersat the tracers that shroud us in gunsmoke.(Perhaps it’s just another carnival joke — your hand on the small of my back? Like bloomsin the sky?) The New Year spokeby spoke nears, but with a breath of tombsthe moment Feste, feeling insolently gay,heckles a rather elderly personage: “Prayyou go out on your toes — or comatose.”I hear Malvolio sayto Olivia holding her sparkler overly close,“Back off — you’re wearing too much hairspray.”III Speaking of ground flowers:Epiphany. The resorts are deadbut for the foreign powersthat raise pistils in a yellow headcrouching on a Cypriot beach.A rough, hairy pod — surprise!— jumps at my touchand squirts seed at my eyes.Because I hear the wind rushagainst the palm-palmswith which our balcony is flush;sky cloud over with qualms;memories blur. Psyche’s actuariesbeg to take the measureof our folded white Januarieswith sleep’s ruled erasure.IV Do I have to be mailed in bubbles ortoiling over bouillabaisse,frisées, port glaze for Sir Omnivore;protagonist of a page-turner, Hazemére or fille; people-pleaser, cocktease,she-bear, in niqab, in getup, in stays;having taken St. Paul’s advice to seizethe gold ring: Who groks the paradox?Though one would sooner burn than freeze    ...    I’ve taken to the dark stuff since you left:a stovetop espresso maker with the heftof a campfire kettleto express more strongly my mettle.
~~~
I could not tell I had jumped off that bus,
that bus in motion, with my child in my arms,
because I did not know it. I believed my own story:   
I had fallen, or the bus had started up
when I had one foot in the air.
I would not remember the tightening of my jaw,   
the irk that I’d missed my stop, the step out   
into the air, the clear child
gazing about her in the air as I plunged
to one knee on the street, scraped it, twisted it,   
the bus skidding to a stop, the driver
jumping out, my daughter laughingDo it again.
I have never done it   
again, I have been very careful.
I have kept an eye on that nice young mother
who lightly leapt
off the moving vehicle
onto the stopped street, her life
in her hands, her life’s life in her hands.
~~~
In the laboratory waiting room
containing
one television actor with a teary face
trying a contact lens;
two muscular victims of industrial accidents;   
several vain women—I was one of them—   
came Deborah, four, to pick up her glass eye.
It was a long day:
Deborah waiting for the blood vessels
painted
on her iris to dry.
Her mother said that, holding Deborah
when she was born,
“First I inspected her, from toes to navel,
then stopped at her head ...”
We wondered why
the inspection hadn’t gone the other way.   
“Looking into her eye
was like looking into a volcano:
“Her vacant pupil
went whirling down, down to the foundation   
of the world ...
When she was three months old they took it out.   
She giggled when she went under
the anaesthetic.
Forty-five minutes later she came back
happy! ...
The gas wore off, she found the hole in her face
(you know, it never bled?),
stayed happy, even when I went to pieces.   
She’s five, in June.
“Deborah, you get right down
from there, or I’ll have to slap!”
Laughing, Deborah climbed into the lap
of one vain lady, who
had been discontented with her own beauty.   
Now she held on to Deborah, looked her steadily   
in the empty eye.
~~~
The kitchen in the house had a nook for eating, a groove
for the broom behind the door and the woman moved through
it like bathing, reaching ladles from drawers, turning to lift
the milk from the refrigerator while still stirring the pudding,
as if the room and everything in it were as intimate to her as her
body, as beautiful and worthy of her attention as the elbows
which each day she soothed with rose lotion or the white legs
she lifted, again and again, in turn, while watching television.
To be in that room must be what it was like to be the man
next to her at night, or the child who, at six o’clock had stood
close enough to smell the wool of her sweater through the steam,
and later, at the goodnight kiss, could breathe the flavor of her hair—
codfish and broccoli—and taste the coffee, which was darkness
on her lips, and listen then from upstairs to the water running
down, the mattress drifting down the river, a pale moonmark
on the floor, and hear the clink of silverware—the stars, their distant
speaking—and picture the ceiling—the back of a woman kneeling,
covering the heart and holding up the bed and roof and cooling sky.
~~~
I wore a garland of the briar that put me now in awe
I wore a garland of the brain that was whole
It commanded me, done babbling
And I no more blabbed, spare no lie
Tell womanhood she shake off pity
Tell the man to give up tumult for the while
To wonder at the sight of baby's beauty
Ne let the monsters fray us with things that not be
From a high tower poem issuing
Everything run along in creation till I end the song
Ne none fit for so wild beasts
Ne none so joyous, ne none no give no lie
Tell old woes to leave off here:
I sing this into a scallop shell with face of a pearl
& leave all sorrow bye & bye.
~~~
with the medicinal poppies of Junenor with Celan’s bloom-fest of dredged stone,       not with history’s choo-choo train of corpses,    not with Nottingham’s Robin Hood             nor Antwerp’s Diamondland.Not walking on the Strand in Manhattan Beach with her      silicone breast implants, refinery, waves of trash,        not out of the Library of Alexandria             with her burnt gardens that prefigure gnarly,        barnacle-laden surfboards broken in half. You can’t build the child with the stone paths         that we have walked on through the atmosphere,            the pirate’s plank, the diving board, the plunge,          nor with the moon whether                 she be zombie or vampire.        Not with Delphi, not with fangs, or cardamom bought                in Fez, red with spring, red with                    marathon running cheeks.            Not with monk chant, bomb chant,         war paint, not with the gigantic Zen pleasure zones,                 nor with this harnessed pig         on the carousel that I am sitting on with my son                 in Nice, France. How it burns on its axis            as if it were turning into pineapple-colored kerosene         the way the Hawaiian pig, apple in snout, roasts             in its own tropical meat under the countdown sun.
~~~
what about those nosegays?! If you were to return
I would give you more, for all you have given us, for
your going first. Those posies might have a
peony, a freesia, a tulip — an eye snack
and nostril snack, I could not get enough of
giving you coronation bundles, handing them
and almost bowing, tongue-tied with
respectful adoring, with gobbling
the sight of you the sound, the bouquets saying mother-
— we would not be here, without your song, your eye. 
~~~
The world’s a world of trouble, your mother must   
                      have told you   
               that. Poison leaks into the basements
and tedium into the schools. The oak   
                      is going the way
               of the elm in the upper Midwest—my cousin
earns a living by taking the dead ones   
                      down.
               And Jason’s alive yet, the fair-
haired child, his metal crib next   
                      to my daughter’s.
             Jason is one but last saw light five months ago
and won’t see light again.                                                  · 
Leaf against leaf without malice   
                     or forethought,
            the manifold species of murmuring
harm. No harm intended, there never is.   
                     The new
            inadequate software gets the reference librarian
fired. The maintenance crew turns off power one            
                     weekend
            and Monday the lab is a morgue: fifty-four
rabbits and seventeen months of research.   
                     Ignorance loves   
          as ignorance does and always
holds high office.   
                                                  ·
Jason had the misfortune to suffer misfortune   
                   the third
          of July. July’s the month of hospital ro-
tations; on holiday weekends the venerable   
                   stay home.
          So when Jason lay blue and inert on the table
and couldn’t be made to breathe for three-and-a-
                  quarter hours,   
         the staff were too green to let him go.
The household gods have abandoned us to the gods   
                  of juris-
         prudence and suburban sprawl. The curve
of new tarmac, the municipal pool,   
                  the sky at work
         on the pock-marked river, fatuous sky,
the park where idling cars, mere yards   
                  from the slide
         and the swingset, deal beautiful oblivion in nickel
bags: the admitting room and its stately drive,   
                  possessed   
         of the town’s best view.                                                 ·
And what’s to become of the three-year-old brother?   
                  When Jason was found   
         face down near the dogdish—it takes
just a cupful of water to drown—
                   his brother stood still
         in the corner and said he was hungry
and said that it wasn’t his fault.   
                  No fault.
         The fault’s in nature, who will
without system or explanation   
                make permanent
         havoc of little mistakes. A natural
mistake, the transient ill-will we define   
                as the normal
         and trust to be inconsequent,
by nature’s own abundance soon absorbed.                                                     ·Oak wilt, it’s called, the new disease.   
                Like any such
         contagion—hypocrisy in the conference room,
flattery in the halls—it works its mischief mostly   
                unremarked.   
         The men on the links haven’t noticed
yet. Their form is good. They’re par.   
                The woman who’s
         prospered from hating ideas loves causes
instead. A little shade, a little firewood.   
                I know
         a stand of oak on which my father’s
earthly joy depends. We’re slow   
                to cut our losses.
~~~
In the northwest corner of Dakota, I saw a room someone had left, a plush sofa returning its button-eyed stare to the glance she gave it over her shoulder, the dog, too, turning. In the next room, the mattress,with mattress stories one after another tumbling out of each spring, the window she opened first thing, its vista of mile after mile, and the windmill hauling its load. 
               I saw that, and nothing alive—green oil-figured linoleum laid on counters,nails of bad craft, the ripped blackening edge that scared her more than the bed and the sound of the windmill winning its will from the aquifer night after night, the whack of her blade on the block. There are houses with too many knives sometimes she said, but when June ferned its way in she'd relent, take on its restraint, heave again on the stained sheets her burden of child, herself a torn girl again, combing her hair through fingers bruised by corn shocks, sweet juice in the cuts of her life.
                                        She began to think of the border and mustangs without brand. At night they'd bend over the bed and nuzzle. One ride was enough. She had sufficient magic to cling to a mane and fare over the windowsill. I see where the curtain fell and nobody mended the tear, I see where bare feet marked like fossils her pass in the rain.When he uncovers fiddleheads by the spring,why does he always think of that first sight of her thigh in the peach-colored dress, of his hand'ssearching moss with its red-gold stamens, the spring in that arid landscape like something from Canaan under his tongue? Even in old age he'd ponder the moment,lying under the moon forgiving himself, her, the world that bred their conundrum, washed in that rain.
~~~
Mouthful of earth, hair half a century silvering, who buried him. With what. Make a fist for heart. That is the size of it.                                                             Also directives from our  DNA.The nature of  his wound was the clock-cicada winding down.                                                            He wound down.July, vapid, humid: sails of sailboats swelled, yellow boxesOf   cigars from Cuba plumped. Ring fingers fattened for a spell.                                                            Barges of coal bloomed in heat. It was when the catfish were the only fish left living                                                             In the Monongahela River. Though there were (they swore) no angels left, one was stillbound in The very drawer of salt and ache and rendering, its wings wrapped-in                                                             By the slink from the strap Of his second-wife’s pearl-satin slip, shimmering and still                   As one herring left face-up in its brine and tin.The nature of  his wound was muscadine and terminal; he was easy                 To take down as a porgy off the cold Atlantic coast.                  In the old city of   Brod, most of the few Jews leftLiving may have been still at supper while he died.That same July, his daughters’ scales came off in every brittle                                                             Tinsel color, washingTo the next slow-yellowed river and the next, toward west,                                                             Ohio-bound.                This is the extent of that. I still have plenty heart.
~~~
I love her fierceness when she fights me, shouting "Not fair!" Her eyes slitting like shutters in cities by the sea. Her life is rife with bonfires—seen and unseen— fires that burn through the turning years bringing her to life again, and again, in a miracle of smoke. This heat gives her a sense of forgiveness—or so I imagine— she kisses my back, capriciously, when I scold her. Maybe she recalls the scalpel by which she was born. Easy, the mark of its slash in my skin. She rose from my belly as I slept. We're bound together by peace, no shrieks of pain, and my modesty. We're a canvas by Giovanni Bellini: a virgin and a sweet rabbit.
~~~
Life is short, though I keep this from my children.
Life is short, and I’ve shortened mine
in a thousand delicious, ill-advised ways,
a thousand deliciously ill-advised ways
I’ll keep from my children. The world is at least
fifty percent terrible, and that’s a conservative
estimate, though I keep this from my children.
For every bird there is a stone thrown at a bird.
For every loved child, a child broken, bagged,
sunk in a lake. Life is short and the world
is at least half terrible, and for every kind
stranger, there is one who would break you,
though I keep this from my children. I am trying
to sell them the world. Any decent realtor,
walking you through a real shithole, chirps on
about good bones: This place could be beautiful,
right? You could make this place beautiful.
 
~~~
... who spoke late
echolalic, then in similes,
by the lake,
where the sticks were her
long mosquitoes, her lava
pyramid brown rice.Got a crush on a suffix,
giggled, blushed,
at every -tion. And there were
many, in conversation,
flirting with her.
Pre-dejection.
Pseudoabstraction.As she grew into
orchestration, a white
sport coat and a pink
carnation, crenellation,
inhalation—
had I known
too much lamentation?I, who have lived
isolation, seen sun
as lion,
its mane’s
diffusion; offered her
a turnip moon,
close-shaven.
Parental anomaly,
weird shared ions.
A word-prescription.
A nerve-ending infatuation.I’m blessed
she’s the termination of me,
last blood relation.
Daughter, if you follow land
to its suffix, there’s ocean,
which I know your toes,
bare, still-growing, slim,
will never shun.
~~~
After IVAN ALBRIGHT’s Into the World There Came a Soul Called Ida



She arrived as near to virginal
as girls got in those days—i.e., young,
the requisite dewy cheek
flushed at its own daring.
He had hoped for a little more edge.
But she held the newspaper rolled like a scepter,
his advertisement turned up to prove
she was there solely at his bidding—and yet
the gold band, the photographs ... a mother, then.
He placed her in the old garden chair,
the same one he went to evenings
when the first tug on the cord sent the bulb
swinging like the lamps in the medic’s tent
over the wounded, swaddled shapes that moaned
each time the Screaming Meemies let loose,
their calculated shrieks so far away
he thought of crickets—while all around him
matted gauze and ether pricked up
an itch so bad he could hardly sketch
each clean curve of tissue opening.I shut my eyes, walk straight to it.
Nothing special but it’s there, wicker
fraying under my calming fingers.
~~~
Cherub-bee-dee how does a man
who doesn’t read English well know that cherub-bee-dum
those aren’t really words-bee-dee.
But birds.
Cherub-bee-dum, he stumbles, reading to me
by the sliding glass door cherub-bee-dee, through which I watch
my brother play in the dum-dum-yard.
Cherub-bee-dee, cherub-bee-dum, like how my father saysFine then! Leave! My mother shouts, Stupid! Dumb!
We live in a small bee-dee-nest too, one hallway to bee-dum-slam doors.
Birds? What are birds?
Thanks to my father, reading with me, I have more feathers.
T-H-E. First word he ever taught me to pluck    ...    It is a word used all the time. Cherub-cherub-bee-dum!The mail. The mailbox. The school bus. The the.
He asks me to read the mail. Not birds, mail.
If you don’t read this, you will turn into birds.
And I read it to him the best I can.
The end. A feather. Two feathers. The. The end.
Mother, mother. Repeat after me.
Cherub-bee-dee, cherub-bee-dum!
We read together before bedtime.
~~~
I have no answer to the blank inequityof a four-year-old dying of cancer.I saw her on t.v. and weptwith my mouth full of meatloaf.I constantly flash on disasters now;red lights shout Warning. Danger.everywhere I look.I buckle him in, but what if a carwith a grille like a sharkbiteroared up out of the road?I feed him square mealsbut what if the fist of his heartshould simply fall open?I carried him safelyas long as I could,but now he's a runawayon the dangerous highway.Warning. Danger.I've started to pray.But the dangerous highwaycurves through blue eveningswhen I hold his yielding handand snip his miniscule nailswith my vicious-looking scissors.I carry him aroundlike an egg in a spoon,and I remember a porcelain fawn,a best friend's trust,my broken faith in myself.It's not my grace that keeps me erectas the sidewalk clatters downhillunder my rollerskate wheels. Sometimes I lie awaketroubled by this thought:It's not so simple to give a child birth;you also have to give it death,the jealous fairy's christening gift.I've always pictured my own deathas a closed door,a black room,a breathless leap from the mountain topwith time to throw out my arms, lift my head,and see, in the instant my heart stops,a whole galaxy of blue.I imagined I'd forget,in the cessation of feeling,while the guilt of my lifetime floated awaylike a nylon nightgown,and that I'd fall into clean, fresh forgiveness.Ah, but the death I've given awayis more mine than the one I've kept:from my hand the poisoned apple,from my bow the mistletoe dart.Then I think of Mama,her bountiful breasts.When I was a child, I really swear,Mama's kisses could heal.I remember her promise,and whisper it over my sweet son's sleep:    When you float to the bottom, child,    like a mote down a sunbeam,    you'll see me from a trillion miles away:    my eyes looking up to you,    my arms outstretched for you like night.
~~~
“Are they real?” We have pages of kitchen utensils and books and candlesticks and nibs, but the charcoal pencil and new sketchpadare squat as aubergines in her hands in front of this display.With bad weather forecast and light silting up in cramped windows,we are the only visitors. The year settles in a corner of the room,has removed its white gloves, tip by tip, and set to one sideits summer purse of bibelots and sheen. Half-term of her final year,we are sightseers intent on moors. In the morning, her windcheaterand red wellies will bestow the dust of summer festivals uponsullen, wind-soaked sheep. We will park, and walk ourselves into the final, cutting rain between pages of her favorite book.She wants to go all the way to Top Withens, or the house they saymust have been Top Withens, given its loneliness and set. But now is artifacts and souvenirs: a perfume with too much musk in it,a jar of damson jam which we probably won’t open until pastits sell-by date. We are buying the word “damson.” And we are buyingtime. “Are they real?” she asks me, and I watch her reckon the distancebetween what should and should never be seen. We have fallen short.She draws, and what she draws is rain falling slant inside the bedroom;the bed as a box of leaves and stones and, within the display case, she hangs from the clothes rail, little moons. On the mannequin, water lilies stand in for morning dress, and the backdrop is marbled in what looks to me like veins and arteries. But when I flick through the sketchpad in the B&B, all the pages, what is left of them, are clean. Next day, she leaves it in the car. When she moves away, she will leaveit again, a sketchpad with no name on it and only the faintest traces of where she made skies of darned linen, and unfastened every stitch.
~~~
I laid the strewings, darling, on thine urn; I lowered the torch, I poured the cup to Dis. Now hushaby, my little child, and learn Long sleep how good it is. In vain thy mother prays, wayfaring hence, Peace to her heart, where only heartaches dwell; But thou more blest, O mild intelligence! Forget her, and Farewell.
~~~
In a side booth at MacDonald’s before your music class
you go up and down in your seat like an arpeggio
under the poster of the talking hamburger:
two white eyes rolling around in the top bun, the thin
patty of beef imitating the tongue of its animal nature.
You eat merrily. I watch the Oakland mommies,
trying to understand what it means to be “single.”
*
Across from us, females of all ages surround the birthday girl.
Her pale lace and insufficient being
can’t keep them out of her circle.
Stripes of yellow and brown all over the place.
The poor in spirit have started to arrive,
the one with thick midwestern braids twisted like thought
on her head; usually she brings her mother.
This week, no mother. She mouths her words anyway
across the table, space-mama, time-mama,
mama who should be there.
*
Families in line: imagine all this
translated by the cry of time moving through us,
this place a rubble. The gardens new generations
will plant in this spot, and the food will go on
in another order. This thought cheers me immensely.
That we will be there together, you still seven,
bending over the crops pretending to be royalty,
that the huge woman with one blind eye
and dots like eyes all over her dress
will also be there, eating with pleasure
as she eats now, right up to the tissue paper,
peeling it back like bright exotic petals.
*
Last year, on the sun-spilled deck in Marin
we ate grapes with the Russians;
the KGB man fingered them quickly and dutifully,
then, in a sad tone to us
“We must not eat them so fast,
we wait in line so long for these,” he said.
*
The sight of food going into a woman’s mouth
made Byron sick. Food is a metaphor for existence.
When Mr. Egotistical Sublime, eating the pasta,
poked one finger into his mouth, he made a sound.
For some, the curve of the bell pepper
seems sensual but it can worry you,
the slightly greasy feel of it.
*
The place I went with your father had an apartment to the left, and in the window, twisted like a huge bowtie,
an old print bedspread. One day, when I looked over,
someone was watching us, a young girl.
The waiter had just brought the first thing:
an orange with an avocado sliced up CCCC
in an oil of forceful herbs. I couldn’t eat it.
The girl’s face stood for something
and from it, a little mindless daylight was reflected.
The businessmen at the next table
were getting off on each other and the young chardonnay.
Their briefcases leaned against their ankles.
I watched the young girl’s face because for an instant
I had seen your face there,
unterrified, unhungry, and a little disdainful.
Then the waiter brought the food,
bands of black seared into it like the memory of a cage.
*
You smile over your burger, chattering brightly.
So often, at our sunny kitchen table,
hearing the mantra of the refrigerator,
I’ve thought there was nothing I could do but feed you;
and I’ve always loved the way you eat,
you eat selfishly, humming, bending
the french fries to your will, your brown eyes
spotting everything: the tall boy
who has come in with his mother, repressed rage
in espadrilles, and now carries the tray for her.
Oh this is fun, says the mother,
You stand there with mommy’s purse.
And he stands there smiling after her,
holding all the patience in the world.
~~~
the winged thang built her dream palace
amid the fine green eyes of a sheltering bough
she did not know it was urban turf
disguised as serenely delusionally rural
nor did she know the neighborhood was rife
with slant-mawed felines and those long-taloned
swoopers of prey. she was ignorant of the acidity & oil
that slowly polluted the earth, and was never
to detect the serpent coiled one strong limb below
following her nature she flitted and dove
for whatever blades twigs and mud
could be found under the humming blue
and created a hatchery for her spawn
not knowing all were doomed
~~~
Father Lear the king so shaped his bairns
with the wand’s upper hand
the fire’s swanny wing
smooth tippet of the spider
In the very kingdom of herbs and servants
he shaped them
from peace vessels of the animals
from toil of the flesh
from milk horses and the birds of sighed mercy
and the tongue undone
He shaped his bairns
in night’s long harm and in day’s bright psalter
in the seven courts of the north
and with the mild birch of the paternoster
From his ploughing fields and his sweat
his toothèd heart and his waxing wit
Father Lear the king shaped his bairns
for good or ill           this he did
~~~
Sleep to sleep through thirty years of night,a child herself with child, for whom we searchedthrough here, or there, amidst bones still sleeved and trousered,a spine picked clean, a paint can, a skull with hairSewn into the hem of memory: Fire. God of Abraham, God of Isaac, God of Jacob,God not of philosophers or scholars. God not of poets. Night to night:child walking toward me through burning maizeover the clean bones of those whose fleshwas lifted by zopilotes into heaven.So that is how we ascend! In the clawed feet of fallen angels. To be assembled again in the work rooms of clouds.She rose from where they found her lyingnot far from a water urn, leaving herself behind on the groundwhere they found her, holding her armsbefore her as if she were asleep.That is how she appears to me: a ghost in heaven.Carrying her arms in her arms.Blue smoke from corn cribs, flap of wings.On the walls of the city streets a plague of initials.Walking through a fire-lit river to a burning house: dead Singersewing machine and piece of dress. Outside a cashew tree wept blackened cashews over lamina. Outside paper fireflies rose to the stars.Bring penicillin if you can, surgical tape, a whetstone, mosquito repellent but not the aerosol kind. Especially bring a syringe for sucking phlegm,a knife, wooden sticks, a surgical clamp, and plastic bags.You will need a bottle of cloud for anesthesia.Like the flight of a crane through colorless dreams.When a leech opens your flesh it leaves a small volcano.Always pour turpentine over your hair before going to sleep.Such experiences as these are forgotten before memory intrudes.The girl was found (don’t say this)with a man’s severed head stuffed into her where a child would have been.No one knew who the man was. Another of the dead. So they had not, after all, killed a pregnant girl. This was a relief to them.That sound in the brush? A settling of wind in sorghum.If they capture you, talk.Talk. Please yes. You heard me right the first time.You will be asked who you are.Eventually, we are all asked who we are.All who come All who come into the worldAll who come into the world are sent.Open your curtain of spirit.
~~~
My mother had two faces and a frying pot   
where she cooked up her daughters
into girls
before she fixed our dinner.
My mother had two faces
and a broken pot
where she hid out a perfect daughter   
who was not me
I am the sun and moon and forever hungry   
for her eyes.
I bear two women upon my back   
one dark and rich and hidden
in the ivory hungers of the other   
mother
pale as a witch
yet steady and familiar
brings me bread and terror
in my sleep
her breasts are huge exciting anchors   
in the midnight storm.
All this has been
before
in my mother's bed
time has no sense
I have no brothers
and my sisters are cruel.
Mother I need
mother I need
mother I need your blackness now   
as the august earth needs rain.   
I am
the sun and moon and forever hungry   
the sharpened edge
where day and night shall meet
and not be
one.
~~~
She sat on a shelf,
her breasts two bellies
on her poked-out belly,
on which the navel looked
like a sucked-in mouth—
her knees bent and apart,
her long left arm raised,
with the large hand knuckled
to a bar in the ceiling—
her right hand clamping
the skinny infant to her chest—
its round, pale, new,
soft muzzle hunting
in the brown hair for a nipple,
its splayed, tiny hand picking
at her naked, dirty ear.
Twisting its little neck,
with tortured, ecstatic eyes
the size of lentils, it looked
into her severe, close-set,
solemn eyes, that beneath bald
eyelids glared—dull lights
in sockets of leather.
She twitched some chin-hairs,
with pain or pleasure,
as the baby-mouth found and
yanked at her nipple;
its pink-nailed, jointless
fingers, wandering her face,
tangled in the tufts
of her cliffy brows.
She brought her big
hand down from the bar
with pretended exasperation
unfastened the little hand,
and locked it within her palm—
while her right hand
with snag-nailed forefinger
and short, sharp thumb, raked
the new orange hair
of the infant’s skinny flank—
and found a louse,
which she lipped, and
thoughtfully crisped
between broad teeth.
She wrinkled appreciative
nostrils which, without a nose,
stood open—damp holes
above the poke of her mouth.
She licked her lips, flicked
her leather eyelids—
then, suddenly flung
up both arms and grabbed
the bars overhead.
The baby's scrabbly fingers
instantly caught the hair—
as if there were metal rings there—
in her long, stretched armpits.
And, as she stately swung,
and then proudly, more swiftly
slung herself from corner
to corner of her cell—
arms longer than her round
body, short knees bent—
her little wild-haired,
poke-mouthed infant hung,
like some sort of trophy,
or decoration, or shaggy medal—
shaped like herself—but new,
clean, soft and shining
on her chest.
~~~
Some places you could die in,
                                                if you could just go on
                                                living there.
The boy, his legs bare and small,
swinging in the stroller, sockless, suede-shoed feet touching
the runner. He can walk, but the woman
keeps him from running
into the street. He won’t obey
but listens to everything we say. Head tilted, face changing
with the conversation. Green leaves leap through fences.
Cars wait while we cross. And each bird the boy greets
with its name, “Bird,” flies away. The sky holds everything.
 
The woman pushes her son’s son along. Her arms strong enough
   to hold
nine strong horses prancing.
She’s given her money away
because someone had to bury
a child. That is the worst thing.
A mother burying her child.
 
I would never do that to her, even though it means
what it means.
A thousand years from now
when I am only a dream
I will dream this dream
of strolling.
Perhaps I am doing so now.
~~~
Love set you going like a fat gold watch.
The midwife slapped your footsoles, and your bald cry   
Took its place among the elements.
Our voices echo, magnifying your arrival. New statue.
In a drafty museum, your nakedness
Shadows our safety. We stand round blankly as walls.
I’m no more your mother
Than the cloud that distills a mirror to reflect its own slow
Effacement at the wind’s hand.
All night your moth-breath
Flickers among the flat pink roses. I wake to listen:
A far sea moves in my ear.
One cry, and I stumble from bed, cow-heavy and floral
In my Victorian nightgown.
Your mouth opens clean as a cat’s. The window square
Whitens and swallows its dull stars. And now you try
Your handful of notes;
The clear vowels rise like balloons.
~~~
One son plays monster rage. His brother
plays ship crashed in a maze. We
are reading Hulk. We are reading
Theseus. White sails, green men,
bright women who give everything
and get nothing. The monster son
would never sail a ship into
a maze, but brothers are not
the same. They hear the same stories
and make different toys of them,
muscled figures in their fists, walls
of wood and magnets. Who knows
why a part of me always departs
this place, glides out the window
to rain and falling leaves, dresses
of wetness and gold. She floats
there, blessed by air, but when
she tries to slip back in, she can’t;
she hangs beyond the glass, panicked,
then bulging with fury. Days later
another part of me flies, into a maple
the color of platelets, and another into
bareness and sky. I’ve lost count of
how many fists are now pounding
my house, how many mouths are
braying how many cries, but here
inside, for now, my dear sons call to me
for their fallen castles, built again,
to find all the missing arrows.
~~~
Last night I awoke knewThat I should say goodbye nowTo these verses. That's how it always goesAfter a few years. They have to get outInto the world. It's not possible to keep themForever! here under the roof.Poor things. They must set out for town.A few will be allowed to return later.But most of them are still hanging around out there.Who knows what will become of them. Before theyFind their peace.
~~~
The girl grew and grew, her mother couldn’t stop it; it terrorized.    What would the finger-dance do? Kindergarten art a buffet of  markers,gluings of stuffs to seasonally-keyed paper, Elmer’s pools drying clear.    A stapling and testing of cylinders versus spheres versus cubesfor kinetic and entropic possibilities, stuffing balled newspaper    into paper-bag dragons, two sweet silver elephants with heads too smalland trunks too long, situated off-center, snuffling flowers. And silver rain.    And 16 silver hearts stacked vertically and strips of masking tape, coloredin reverse rainbow. Unnamable tendrils diffusing to scribbles. A bird.    Another bird, more rain, peace signs, a horse with sideways-flowing mane,and knowledge: that the sky’s full of black-struck Ms and Ws, drifting    clouds; that her kitty cats watch sunsets; sky doesn’t reachdown to meet the earth; mother shrinks to the size of a penis.
~~~
I tell him to touch his toes. He reaches for them in a squat.
He stabs them with his little fingers. One toe. Two toes.
Then we say our letters, spell out all the sounds we will deliverbecause the death of a child is no small death.
I extend to him an open palm where he makes a fist
and slams it into my hand, a form, he wearily shouts,
is “a butterfly coming home!” We play “give me a five”
and continue swatting at the butterfliesuntil the sun goes down.
I don’t recall ever playing with my mother like this.
Late one morning, my son caught me pinching
the sides of my head, my face wet from so much crying.
He punched my arm, which knocked one hand off
of my face. Ashamed that he saw me, I laughed very loudly
which brought him concern and happiness. He never
mentioned it again and I never forgave myself.My good son, running through the garden
in giggles. He is waiting for me to catch him. Once
I pretended to have fallen in a pit. I did not tell him
it was a grave. Very quickly he sprinted over and stood
beside my body. “Your hand!” he demanded.
Like a little father. I gave him my hand.
“Now, the other hand!” I give him the other.
~~~
In the back of the charm-box, in a sack, the baby    canines and incisors are mostly chaff,  by now, split kernels and acicular down, no  whole utensils left: half  an adz; half a shovel, in its broken  handle a marrow well of the will  to dig and bite. And the enamel hems  are sharp as shell-tools, and the colors go from  salt, to bone, to pee on snow, to  sun on pond-ice embedded with twigs  and chipped-off skate-blade. One cuspid  is like the tail of an ivory chough  on my grandmother's what-not in a gravure on my mother's  bureau in my father's house in my head,  I think it's our daughter's, but the dime Hermes  mingled the deciduals of our girl and boy, safe-  keeping them together with the note that says  Dear Toth Farry, Plees Giv Me  A Bag of Moany
~~~
“Son,” said my mother,
   When I was knee-high, 
“You’ve need of clothes to cover you,
   And not a rag have I.
 
“There’s nothing in the house
   To make a boy breeches,
Nor shears to cut a cloth with
   Nor thread to take stitches.
 
“There’s nothing in the house
   But a loaf-end of rye,
And a harp with a woman’s head
   Nobody will buy,”      And she began to cry.
 
That was in the early fall.
   When came the late fall, 
“Son,” she said, “the sight of you   
   Makes your mother’s blood crawl,—
 
“Little skinny shoulder-blades
   Sticking through your clothes!
And where you’ll get a jacket from
   God above knows.
 
“It’s lucky for me, lad,
   Your daddy’s in the ground,
And can’t see the way I let
   His son go around!”
   And she made a queer sound.
 
That was in the late fall.
   When the winter came,
I’d not a pair of breeches
   Nor a shirt to my name.
 
I couldn’t go to school,
   Or out of doors to play.
And all the other little boys
   Passed our way.
 
“Son,” said my mother,
   “Come, climb into my lap,
And I’ll chafe your little bones
   While you take a nap.”
 
And, oh, but we were silly
   For half an hour or more,
Me with my long legs
   Dragging on the floor,
 
A-rock-rock-rocking
   To a mother-goose rhyme!
Oh, but we were happy
   For half an hour’s time!
 
But there was I, a great boy,
   And what would folks say
To hear my mother singing me
   To sleep all day,
   In such a daft way?
 
Men say the winter
   Was bad that year;
Fuel was scarce,
   And food was dear.
 
A wind with a wolf’s head
   Howled about our door,
And we burned up the chairs
   And sat on the floor.
 
All that was left us
   Was a chair we couldn’t break,
And the harp with a woman’s head
   Nobody would take,
   For song or pity’s sake.
 
The night before Christmas
   I cried with the cold,
I cried myself to sleep
   Like a two-year-old.
 
And in the deep night
   I felt my mother rise,
And stare down upon me
   With love in her eyes.
 
I saw my mother sitting
   On the one good chair,
A light falling on her
   From I couldn’t tell where,
 
Looking nineteen,
   And not a day older,
And the harp with a woman’s head
   Leaned against her shoulder.
 
Her thin fingers, moving
   In the thin, tall strings,
Were weav-weav-weaving
   Wonderful things.
 
Many bright threads,
   From where I couldn’t see,
Were running through the harp-strings
  Rapidly,
 
And gold threads whistling
   Through my mother’s hand.
I saw the web grow,
   And the pattern expand.
 
She wove a child’s jacket,
   And when it was done
She laid it on the floor
   And wove another one.
 
She wove a red cloak
   So regal to see, 
“She’s made it for a king’s son,”
   I said, “and not for me.”
   But I knew it was for me.
 
She wove a pair of breeches
   Quicker than that!
She wove a pair of boots
   And a little cocked hat.
 
She wove a pair of mittens,
   She wove a little blouse,
She wove all night
   In the still, cold house.
 
She sang as she worked,
   And the harp-strings spoke;
Her voice never faltered,
   And the thread never broke.
   And when I awoke,—
 
There sat my mother
   With the harp against her shoulder
Looking nineteen
   And not a day older,
 
A smile about her lips,
   And a light about her head,
And her hands in the harp-strings
   Frozen dead.
 
And piled up beside her
   And toppling to the skies,
Were the clothes of a king’s son,
   Just my size.
~~~
Sweetheart
when you break thru
you’ll find
a poet here
not quite what one would choose.
I won’t promise
you’ll never go hungry
or that you won’t be sad
on this gutted
breaking
globe
but I can show you
baby
enough to love
to break your heart
forever
~~~
There is something in the sound of drum and fife That stirs all the savage instincts into life.   In the old times of peace we went our ways, Through proper days Of little joys and tasks. Lonely at times, When from the steeple sounded wedding chimes, Telling to all the world some maid was wife— But taking patiently our part in life As it was portioned us by Church and State, Believing it our fate.     Our thoughts all chaste Held yet a secret wish to love and mate     Ere youth and virtue should go quite to waste. But men we criticised for lack of strength, And kept them at arm's length. Then the war came— The world was all aflame! The men we had thought dull and void of power Were heroes in an hour. He who had seemed a slave to petty greed Showed masterful in that great time of need. He who had plotted for his neighbour's pelf, Now for his fellows offers up himself. And we were only women, forced by war To sacrifice the things worth living for.  Something within us broke,    Something within us woke,        The wild cave-woman spoke.  When we heard the sound of drumming,    As our soldiers went to camp,    Heard them tramp, tramp, tramp; As we watched to see them coming,    And they looked at us and smiled    (Yes, looked back at us and smiled), As they filed along by hillock and by hollow,    Then our hearts were so beguiled    That, for many and many a day,    We dreamed we heard them say, 'Oh, follow, follow, follow!'    And the distant, rolling drum    Called us 'Come, come, come!'    Till our virtue seemed a thing to give away.   War had swept ten thousand years away from earth.    We were primal once again.    There were males, not modern men; We were females meant to bring their sons to birth.    And we could not wait for any formal rite,    We could hear them calling to us, 'Come to-night; For to-morrow, at the dawn, We move on!'    And the drum    Bellowed, 'Come, come, come!' And the fife Whistled, 'Life, life, life!'   So they moved on and fought and bled and died; Honoured and mourned, they are the nation's pride. We fought our battles, too, but with the tide Of our red blood, we gave the world new lives. Because we were not wives We are dishonoured. Is it noble, then, To break God's laws only by killing men To save one's country from destruction? We took no man's life but gave our chastity, And sinned the ancient sin To plant young trees and fill felled forests in.   Oh, clergy of the land, Bible in hand, All reverently you stand,    On holy thoughts intent    While barren wives receive the sacrament! Had you the open visions you could see    Phantoms of infants murdered in the womb,    Who never knew a cradle or a tomb, Hovering about these wives accusingly.   Bestow the sacrament! Their sins are not well known— Ours to the four winds of the earth are blown.
~~~
Mid-morning Monday she is staring
peaceful as the rain in that shallow back yard
she wears flannel bedroom slippers
she is sipping coffee
she is thinking—
                            —gazing at the weedy bumpy yard
at the faces beginning to take shape
in the wavy mud
in the linoleum
where floorboards assert themselves
Women whose lives are food
breaking eggs with care
scraping garbage from the plates
unpacking groceries hand over hand
Wednesday evening: he takes the cans out front
tough plastic with detachable lids
Thursday morning: the garbage truck whining at 7
Friday the shopping mall open till 9
bags of groceries unpacked
hand over certain hand
Men whose lives are money
time-and-a-half Saturdays
the lunchbag folded with care and brought back home
unfolded Monday morning
Women whose lives are food
because they are not punch-carded
because they are unclocked
sighing glad to be alone
staring into the yard, mid-morning
mid-week
by mid-afternoon everything is forgotten
There are long evenings
panel discussions on abortions, fashions, meaningful work
there are love scenes where people mouth passions
sprightly, handsome, silly, manic
in close-ups revealed ageless
the women whose lives are food
the men whose lives are money
fidget as these strangers embrace and weep and mis-
            understand and forgive and die and weep and embrace
and the viewers stare and fidget and sigh and
begin yawning around 10:30
never made it past midnight, even on Saturdays,
watching their braven selves perform
Where are the promised revelations?
Why have they been shown so many times?
Long-limbed children a thousand miles to the west
hitch-hiking in spring, burnt bronze in summer
thumbs nagging
eyes pleadingGive us a ride, huh? Give us a ride?
and when they return nothing is changed
the linoleum looks older
the Hawaiian Chicken is new
the girls wash their hair more often
the boys skip over the puddles
in the GM parking lot
no one eyes them with envy
their mothers stoop
the oven doors settle with a thump
the dishes are rinsed and stacked and
by mid-morning the house is quiet
it is raining out back
or not raining
the relief of emptiness rains
simple, terrible, routine
at peace
 