We are a sad people, without hats. The history of our nation is tragically benign. We like to watch the rabbits screwing in the graveyard. We are fond of the little bunny with the bent ear who stands alone in the moonlight reading what little text there is on the graves. He looks quite desirable like that. He looks like the center of the universe. Look how his mouth moves mouthing the words while the others are busy making more of him. Soon the more will ask of him to write their love letters and he will oblige, using the language of our ancestors, those poor clouds in the ground, beloved by us who have been standing here for hours, a proud people after all.
~~~
I rode him through the village, smiling.
He tossed his tasseled mane in distress.
The villagers took his gesture as vanity,
and made no attempt to rein him back.
Camped at night by stream and fire,
he seemed to think stories were in order.
The ghoulish tales twisting out his mouth
no longer frightened me. On leaving,
I'd taken on a certain complacency. Later,
he'd characterize my silence as merely
mean. But what is mean about a mouth
that, having no stories, claims it can provide
no flower for the ear, no wine for the wind?
I tried: I told the tale of him, which he
(the version being mine) was not much
interested in. But all of us, the fattening
moon, the yewey trees, the sharp-toothed
stars who combed their glowing backs against
the sky like cats: we laughed. And now
that I had left, where would I take him?
He was vehicle and, as such, responsibility.
He was deadening, tiresome, and necessary.
I made ourselves a home and kept him gently
as a pet. Visitors often wonder aloud,
How do you manage to keep such a creature
inside? The floors are stained with his keep.
I tell them my heart is huge and its doors
are small. Once I took him in he grew. Now
I cannot remove him without killing him,
which, frankly, I have never wanted to do.
~~~
From the sequence “Shekhinah Speaks”

Comfort, comfort my people ...
—Isaiah 40:1



A voice says, “Your punishment has ended.”
You never listen to that voice. You really suck
at being comforted.
Another voice says, “Cry.”
That voice always gets your attention,
keeps you thinking
about withered flowers and withering grass
and all the ways you’re like them.
Hard to argue with that.
Death tramples you, an un-housebroken pet
trailing prints and broken stems,
pooping anxiety, PTSD, depression.
It’s better to be animal than vegetable
but best of all is to be spirit
flying first or maybe business class
with your emotional support animal, your body,
curled in your lap, soaring with you
above the sense of loss you’ve mistaken
for the closest to God you can get.
You want to cry? Cry about that.
Who do you think created
the animals to whom you turn for comfort,
dogs, miniature horses, monkeys, ferrets,
hungers you know how to feed,
fears you know how to quiet?
I form them, fur them,
it’s my warmth radiating from their bodies,
my love that answers
the love you lavish upon them.
Your deserts and desolations
are highways I travel,
smoothing your broken places,
arranging stars and constellations
to light your wilderness.
Sometimes I play the shepherd;
sometimes I play the lamb;
sometimes I appear as death,
which makes it hard to remember
that I am the one who assembled your atoms,
who crowned your dust with consciousness.
I take you everywhere,
which is why, wherever you go, I’m there,
keeping you hydrated, stroking your hair,
laughing when you chase your tail,
gathering you to my invisible breasts
more tenderly than any mother.
You’re right—you never asked for this. I’m the reason
your valleys are being lifted up,
the source of your life laid bare.
Mine is the voice that decrees—
that begs—your anguish to end.
When you suffer, I suffer.
Comfort me
by being comforted.
~~~
1. Is it true that they dream?
      
      It is true, for the spaces of night surround them with shape and purpose, like a warm hollow below the shoulders, or between the curve of thigh and belly.   
      The land itself can lie like this. Hence our understanding of giants.
      The wind and the grass cry out to the arms of their sleep as the shore cries out, and buries its face in the bruised sea.
      We all have heard barns and fences splintering against the dark with a weight that is more than wood.
      The stars, too, bear witness. We can read their tails and claws as we would read the signs of our own dreams; a knot of sheets, scratches defining the edges of the body, the position of the legs upon waking.
      The cage and the forest are as helpless in the night as a pair of open hands holding rain.
2. Do they dream of the past or of the future?
      Think of the way a woman who wanders the roads could step into an empty farmhouse one afternoon and find a basket of eggs, some unopened letters, the pillowcases embroidered with initials that once were hers.
      Think of her happiness as she sleeps in the daylilies; the air is always heaviest at the start of dusk.
      Cows, for example, find each part of themselves traveling at a different rate of speed. Their bells call back to their burdened hearts the way a sparrow taunts an old hawk.
      As far as the badger and the owl are concerned, the past is a silver trout circling in the ice. Each night he swims through their waking and makes his way back to the moon.
    Clouds file through the dark like prisoners through an endless yard. Deer are made visible by their hunger.
    I could also mention the hopes of common spiders: green thread sailing from an infinite spool, a web, a thin nest, a child dragging a white rope slowly through the sand.
3. Do they dream of this world or of another?
    The prairie lies open like a vacant eye, blind to everything but the wind. From the tall grass the sky is an industrious map that bursts with rivers and cities. A black hawk waltzes against his clumsy wings, the buzzards grow bored with the dead.
    A screendoor flapping idly on an August afternoon or a woman fanning herself in church; this is how the tails of snakes and cats keep time even in sleep.
    There are sudden flashes of light to account for. Alligators, tormented by knots and vines, take these as a sign of grace. Eagles find solace in the far glow of towns, in the small yellow bulb a child keeps by his bed. The lightning that scars the horizon of the meadow is carried in the desperate gaze of foxes.
    Have other skies fallen into this sky? All the evidence seems to say so.
    Conspiracy of air, conspiracy of ice, the silver trout is thirsty for morning, the prairie dog shivers with sweat. Skeletons of gulls lie scattered on the dunes, their beaks still parted by whispering. These are the languages that fall beyond our hearing.
    Imagine the way rain falls around a house at night, invisible to its sleepers. They do not dream of us.
4. How can we learn more?   
      
    This is all we will ever know.
~~~
Every day a wilderness—no  shade in sight. Beulah patient among knicknacks,  the solarium a rage of light, a grainstorm as her gray cloth brings dark wood to life. Under her hand scrolls and crests gleam darker still. What was his name, that silly boy at the fair with the rifle booth? And his kiss and  the clear bowl with one bright  fish, rippling wound! Not Michael— something finer. Each dust  stroke a deep breath and  the canary in bloom. Wavery memory: home  from a dance, the front door  blown open and the parlor  in snow, she rushed the bowl to the stove, watched  as the locket of ice dissolved and he swam free. That was years before Father gave her up with her name, years before  her name grew to mean  Promise, then  Desert-in-Peace. Long before the shadow and  sun’s accomplice, the tree. Maurice.
~~~
The Bone-man lives in a stucco
house. He ticks his heels
on the cold terrazzo floor.
He parks his ragtruck
in the yard, instructs his crew
on the white telephone.
I am training my dog
to attack the red-capped hunter
bearing his long package.
I am training the tethered jay
to cry out against
the killer who cracks the latch.
On the open map, the road
to my house bulges like a vein.
He takes a train, he rents
a car, he lurches in
with an open fly. Sweet Eve
was just the Farmer’s Daughter,
he wooed her with a wormy apple.
He’s a dirty joke, he’s
always everybody’s last
lover, he’s a regular
can of worms—you wry Medusa,
I am a mongoose staring you down.
~~~
After the birthing of bombs of forks and fear
the frantic automatic weapons unleashed,
the spray of bullets into a crowd holding hands,
that brute sky opening in a slate metal maw
that swallows only the unsayable in each of us, what’s
left? Even the hidden nowhere river is poisoned
orange and acidic by a coal mine. How can
you not fear humanity, want to lick the creek
bottom dry, to suck the deadly water up into
your own lungs, like venom? Reader, I want to
say: Don’t die. Even when silvery fish after fish
comes back belly up, and the country plummets
into a crepitating crater of hatred, isn’t there still
something singing? The truth is: I don’t know.
But sometimes, I swear I hear it, the wound closing
like a rusted-over garage door, and I can still move
my living limbs into the world without too much
pain, can still marvel at how the dog runs straight
toward the pickup trucks break-necking down
the road, because she thinks she loves them,
because she’s sure, without a doubt, that the loud
roaring things will love her back, her soft small self
alive with desire to share her goddamn enthusiasm,
until I yank the leash back to save her because
I want her to survive forever. Don’t die, I say,
and we decide to walk for a bit longer, starlings
high and fevered above us, winter coming to lay
her cold corpse down upon this little plot of earth.
Perhaps we are always hurtling our body towards
the thing that will obliterate us, begging for love
from the speeding passage of time, and so maybe,
like the dog obedient at my heels, we can walk together
peacefully, at least until the next truck comes.
~~~
A free bird leaps
on the back of the wind   
and floats downstream   
till the current ends
and dips his wing
in the orange sun rays
and dares to claim the sky.
But a bird that stalks
down his narrow cage
can seldom see through
his bars of rage
his wings are clipped and   
his feet are tied
so he opens his throat to sing.
The caged bird sings   
with a fearful trill   
of things unknown   
but longed for still   
and his tune is heard   
on the distant hill   
for the caged bird   
sings of freedom.
The free bird thinks of another breeze
and the trade winds soft through the sighing trees
and the fat worms waiting on a dawn bright lawn
and he names the sky his own
But a caged bird stands on the grave of dreams   
his shadow shouts on a nightmare scream   
his wings are clipped and his feet are tied   
so he opens his throat to sing.
The caged bird sings   
with a fearful trill   
of things unknown   
but longed for still   
and his tune is heard   
on the distant hill   
for the caged bird   
sings of freedom.
~~~
         for Kathe Izzo



I was 6 and

I lost my snake.

 

The table shook

I can do better

than this

and shambled

to the kitchen

to the scene

of the crime

 

I was green

I put my sneaker

down, little shoe

 

I felt the cold

metal tap

my calf

 

moo and everything

began to change.

I am 6

turned into lightning

wrote on the night

 

At 6, I was feathers

scales, I fell into

the slime of it, lit

 

You think you are six,

it yelled. I am face

to face with a frog

a woman alone

in bed. The square

of the window

persists. I am 6.

 

The phone rings

It’s my sister

blamm I dropped

a plate. Sorry.

 

Now the clouds slide           

by afraid, awake

my feet are cold

but I’m fearless

 

I am 6.

 

Under here

with bottle caps

and stars

adults and low

moans, busses

 

slamming on brakes

I am 6

 

the cake is lit

it’s round

the children

sing. I will never

return. We are

so small.

 

My husband turns

his fevered

face. I put

the medicine

down. Click.

I am 6.

 

The movie rolls on.

Tramping feet,

music blaring

at the end of

the war. I

am frightened

hold my hand

 

The round face

of the woman

upstairs, moving

the faucets, strips

of vegetable

 

slithering down,

her reptile child

will never

return. The telephone

 rings. It’s me.

I’m six.
~~~
Mossy and thumping, bare of logic, red:             why do they say your other head                          and not your other heart? The snack cakes of Smut Wonderlandturn Alice smaller than her dress. She stirs,nude in the folds of so much baby blue.              To think, they called this lesser art.I ate mostly orders then, and you—you were thinking with your other heart. I took in a dog the way some might take in             a dress (I had become just skin).                          It coughed. I cried for itto stop, I fed it meat, its maladyrecurrent and untreatable. I had to give it up, like some bum body part              whose incidental benefitthe human form has out-evolved. Don’t start.That dog: I called it Help, and I cried for it.
~~~
Turn again, turn again,Goose Clothilda, Goosie Jane.Bright wooden waves of people creakFrom houses built with coloured strawsOf heat; Dean Pasppus’ long nose snoresHarsh as a hautbois, marshy-weak.The wooden waves of people creakThrough the fields all water-sleek.And in among the straws of lightThose bumpkin hautbois-sounds take flight.Whence he lies snoring like the moonClownish-white all afternoon.Beneath the trees’ arsenicalSharp woodwind tunes; heretical—Blown like the wind’s mane(Creaking woodenly again).His wandering thoughts escape like geeseTill he, their gooseherd, sets up chase,And clouds of wool join the bright raceFor scattered old simplicities.
~~~
Mary had a little lamb,
Its fleece was white as snow;
And everywhere that Mary went
The lamb was sure to go.
It followed her to school one day,
Which was against the rule;
It made the children laugh and play
To see a lamb at school.
And so the teacher turned it out,
But still it lingered near,
And waited patiently about
Till Mary did appear.
Why does the lamb love Mary so?
The eager children cry;
Why, Mary loves the lamb, you know,
The teacher did reply.
~~~
What I adore is not horses, with their moderndomestic life span of 25 years. What I adoreis a bug that lives only one day, especially ifit’s a terrible day, a day of train derailment orchemical lake or cop admits to cover-up, a daywhen no one thinks of anything else, least of allthat bug. I know how it feels, born as I’ve beeninto these rotting times, as into sin. Everybody’sbusy, so distraught they forget to kill me,and even that won’t keep me alive. I sharemy home not with horses, but with a little dogwho sees poorly at dusk and menaces stumps,makes her muscle known to every statue.I wish she could have a single day of   language,so that I might reassure her don’t be afraid —our whole world is dead and so can do you no harm.
~~~
Two horses were put together in the same paddock.
Night and day. In the night and in the day
wet from heat and the chill of the wind
on it. Muzzle to water, snorting, head swinging
and the taste of bay in the shadowed air.
The dignity of being. They slept that way,
knowing each other always.
Withers quivering for a moment,
fetlock and the proud rise at the base of the tail,
width of back. The volume of them, and each other’s weight.
Fences were nothing compared to that.
People were nothing. They slept standing,
their throats curved against the other’s rump.
They breathed against each other,
whinnied and stomped.
There are things they did that I do not know.
The privacy of them had a river in it.
Had our universe in it. And the way
its border looks back at us with its light.
This was finally their freedom.
The freedom an oak tree knows.
That is built at night by stars.
~~~
White horses, tails high, rise from the cedar.
Smoke brings the fat crickets,
trembling breeze.
Find that holy place, a promise.
Embers glow like moon air.
I call you back from the grasses.
Wake me when sand pipers
fly. They fade,
and new sounds flutter. Cattails at sunrise.
Hair matted by sleep.
Sun on the meadow. Grey boughs lie tangled.
The ground I was born to
wants me to leave.
I’ve searched everywhere to tell you
my eyes are with the hazels.
Wind swells through fences, drones a flat ache for hours.
At night, music would echo
from your womanless bedroom.
Far down those bleaching cliffs,
roses shed a torrent.
Will you brush my ear? An ice bear sometimes lumbers west.
Your life still gleams, the edge melting.
I never let you know.
You showed me and how under snow and darkness,
the grasses breathe for miles.
 
~~~
Lie down—lie down!—my noble hound,          That joyful bark give o’er; It wakes the lonely echoes round,          But rouses me no more— Thy lifted ears, thy swelling chest,          Thy eyes so keenly bright, No longer kindle in my breast          The thrill of fierce delight; When following thee on foaming steed My eager soul outstripped thy speed— Lie down—lie down—my faithful hound!          And watch this night by me, For thee again the horn shall sound          By mountain, stream, and tree; And thou along the forest glade,          Shall track the flying deer When cold and silent, I am laid          In chill oblivion here. Another voice shall cheer thee on, And glory when the chase is won. Lie down—lie down!—my gallant hound!          Thy master’s life is sped; Go—couch thee on the dewy ground—          ’Tis thine to watch the dead. But when the blush of early day          Is kindling up the sky, Then speed thee, faithful friend, away,          And to thy mistress hie; And guide her to this lonely spot, Though my closed eyes behold her not— Lie down—lie down!—my trusty hound!          Death comes, and we must part— In my dull ear strange murmurs sound—          More faintly throbs my heart; The many twinkling lights of heaven          Scarce glimmer in the blue— Chill round me falls the breath of even,          Cold on my brow the dew; Earth, stars, and heavens, are lost to sight— The chase is o’er!—brave friend, good night!—
~~~
the car had a cover over itand it was over the wheelsand it hurt my ass and I couldn’t sleep. It seems I should move, go forward nowI was wandering through the jungleanywhere on earth but I was a womanin bed in New York and how many people have died in wild placesdreaming you were still in bedwould you know. Travel wellI said to my dog when shewent on her journey thinkingof a cheap movieI’ve thought this was an urnturning this was on waterthis was flatbut now I see light betweenthe trees I see water tricklingthrough stone this is not made of   language but energythat will stop when I diethe dream dies tooone bolt
~~~
Into the changes of autumn brush
the doe walked, and the hide, head, and ears
were the tinsel browns. They made her.
I could not see her. She reappeared, stuffed with apples,
and I shot her. Into the pines she ran,
and I ran after. I might have lost her,
seeing no sign of blood or scuffle,
but felt myself part of the woods,
a woman with a doe’s ears, and heard her
dying, counted her last breaths like a song
of dying, and found her dying.
I shot her again because her lungs rattled like castanets,
then poked her with the gun barrel
because her eyes were dusty and unreal.
I opened her belly and pushed the insides
like rotted fruit into a rabbit hole,
skinned her, broke her leg joints under my knee,
took the meat, smelled the half-digested smell
that was herself. Ah, I closed her eyes.
I left her refolded in some briars
with the last sun on her head
like a benediction, head tilted on its axis
of neck and barren bone; head bent
wordless over a death, though I heard
the night wind blowing through her fur,
heard riot in the emptied head.
~~~
I saw an eagle sweep to the sky— The Godlike! – seeking his place on high, With a strong, and wild, and rapid wing—A dark, and yet a dazzling thing; And his arching neck, his bristling crest, And the dark plumes quivering upon his breast; And his eye, bent up to each beam of light, Like a bright sword flash’d with a sword in fight. I saw him rise o’er the forest trees; I saw his pinion ride the breeze; Beyond the clouds I watched him tower On his path of pride – his flight of power. I watched him wheeling, stern and lone, Where the keenest ray of the sun was thrown; Soaring, circling – bathed in light: Such was that desert eagle’s flight. Suddenly, then, to my straining eye, I saw the strong wing slack on high; Falling, falling to earth once more; The dark breast covered with foam and gore; The dark eyes’ glory dim with pain; Sick to death with a sun-struck brain! Reeling down from that height divine, Eagle of heaven! such fall was thine! Even so we see the sons of light, Up to the day-beam steer their flight; And the wing of genius cleaves the sky, As the clouds rush on when the winds are high: Then comes the hour of sudden dread—  Then is the blasting sunlight shed; And the gifted fall in their agony, Sund-struck eagle! to die like thee!
~~~
White hail pelting the frozen bog,I’m stuck in the first line of January,following my host’s dogon his walk through the stone century,around the quarry, slices of marble and mud,past a herd of miners exhaling smoke,past a barn smelling of merde,and back to where I’m stuck and broke.The fucking dog barks at the night,mad at the stars all his life and then again.I rethink kicking him out,but being cool, I let him in.
~~~
The Bison is vain, and (I write it with pain)
   The Door-mat you see on his head
Is not, as some learned professors maintain,   
The opulent growth of a genius’ brain;
   But is sewn on with needle and thread.
~~~
The baby sleeps.Sunlight plays upon my lap, through doily leaves a black lab comes,a scotty goes, the day wears on, the baby wakes.The good birds sing,invisible or seldom seen, in hidden kingdoms, grateful for the in-between. The baby sleeps. Elsewhere the Queen rolls byon gusts of cheer — ladies wave and bless her reign. The baby frets. The baby feeds.The end of lunch, a daytime moon. The leavesare lightly tinkered with.It’s spring? No, autumn? Afternoon? We’ve sat so long, we’ve walkedso far. The woods in shade, the woods in sun, the singing birds,the noble trees.The child is grown. The child is gone. The black lab comes,his circuit done. His mistress coils his scarlet lead.
~~~
    
 
i came close to his WET dog’s eye & a FAT tear shared animal PAIN sloshed & seeped in between us — “darling I’m sorry you were born a dog & people notice it” , 
2 COME ON IN, WE’VE BEEN EXPECTING YOU
like a clue
we found PEOPLE
in the KITCHEN
in the SUICIDE VEST
with the KALASHNIKOV
such beautiful, desperate weapons
their faces
had to be covered
so we didn’t fall in love
piteously
with the self-same wretchedness
we see in mirrors
a worryingly familiar scene
we’ve lived in will live in
the carnage
going on
behind closed doors
being told, regurgitatingly, “you only get one shot!”
but is it true
you only get one shot
when you get a loaded magazine
& plenty more
where that came from
in the MUNITIONS DEPOT
which I picture in Arizona, right
beside a render farm
and to the left
THE CLOUD
that backs up
and up and up
up
to where
are there edges, Bobby?
INTELLIGENCE tells us
to test the power of names
by naming things, for one thing
to name is to guarantee the end
like a starting pistol
BANG
            you name
                            it         it’s
                         !
                 smithereens
4
I am so indifferent
to the limits
of feelings
I can’t tell the difference
every time someone lifts my flap
the unwashed salad
the unheated leftovers
the sanitary products are standard
but bear no relation
to what I expected
to feel overlaid
with various forms of filth
don’t you sometimes feel
like getting wrapped in a dog towel
and buried in the hardening ground
under the Canadian maple? Do dogs
need to approach death
and back away from it
like I did when the vet injected
deep pentobarbital & his bowels
ejected across the floor tiles
I was there
to inhale his fur and weep
for my benefit
I am not independent
of my feelings this way
of talking about feelings
has fooled each one of us
                             I’d rather be given CBT
                             by a border collie
when there are fewer words around
my arms around
his only
adored and stinking
neck 
dead
up my nostrils
throw me in there with him everything is in the cold awful and I’m not OK and without good reason still here and
 
 
 
 
 
 
feelings
 
 
 
6 JUST A GENTLE REMINDER
A LOT OF WORK
goes into making sex alluring sex
is just this and that
but it seemed, for a moment, that a new
climax had been won when
even the sky fingered me
with a slobbery insistence when
we were retching with so much desire
we created a whole new atmosphere
grabbing at sex things /
using the sick bag to be actually sick in
now the shower curtain is transparent
it’s a way of saying, “I want you too
to have this experience
so that we are more alike
like a sign that life struck once
in a slippy-bits marathon
that began when our eyes were magnets
yanked to each other’s fully-charged
crotches at a picnic
when it was essential
to make every enhancement
to our ‘connection’ by getting seriously indecent
beside the Bluetooth wireless speaker system
until even the trees had to dash inside
to pour ice in their underpants”
while I choked up playing the scene, as we lived it,
united by our pursuit of arrhythmia or
satisfying itches to that
catchy bridge section in Chopin
(I couldn’t wait to come
with Chopin through his melancholic meadow
(not that I approve of background music
(I prefer to foreground the piano
by massaging it loud and all over
until the top layer comes off in my hand
and the pedal squeaks for humanity
(I like to FEEL a piano as an instrument
of interruption and consciousness
(though I also like to take light swims, to get away
from what I FEEL (today I felt
jelly beans resemble kidneys))))))
which throbs like everyone grieving
 
 
 
 
 
7 HERE, HAVE A NEW PUPPY
said the Russians to the French
to soften the dog-loss
but mostly the dog’s image the image
is the greater likeness
except we never seem to run out of images
sometimes something in an image
runs through me and that is very common
as is reading about something
that’s happening to someone outside of me
until I know someone outside of me
without any knowledge
it is a test for my knowledge
to hang around until morning
practically all mornings are news to me
practically all knowledge is news to me
practically all news is images
going very fast around the world
so we have to guzzle them
like wrapped food
— hot and on the run —
in one end and squitted out the other
[pics or it didn’t happen]
until I’m fat with implications
and containing not a sausage
 
9
I love a good weepy
dog-meme as much as the next crybaby
and nauseate irregularly
when the gifs load automatically
his hairy body
into my hairy body
unfairly the dog
becomes the shape of 2:13 p.m.
in me on a Tuesday
if we accept the world as totally fucked
there’s a lot worse coming
than dog hairs in macaroni cheese dog hairs on pillows dog hairs in rented flats in bathtubs in my hair in my dog’s hair in your short & curlies between my teeth in coagulant soap bars
some people are revolted
by dogs and dogs
are not up for revolting
I am revolted
when dogs are lacking
what if he did lick my cheeks
by which I mean “buttocks”
which were coated in whipped shea butter and
heavily comestible
it’s obvious he’s related to a father
he never knew
because we found all his needs
and perverted them
into a kind of inter-species loyalty
or the usual master-slave hierarchy
before laying down the crisp breakfast bowl
of the rest of his days
which gave us carte blanche to rush in anytime
and smother him with kisses
without getting socked in the eye
(unlike when I tried the same on Johnny (who spat my tongue out
      (& no one blamed him)))
when maybe all he wants is
just to go on
being less and less
subtle and alive
the way life becomes
very well known after its termination
 
 
12
If rigor mortis sets in
it means there’s somebody who needs it.
It means that somebody
is drained and not awake
and deems any speckles of life unusable
and he is dead and dead
all dead in the humus
of trashed bodies shoved down there
dressed in made-up relationships.
What’s your favorite part?
Mine’s every part
with a maggot in it. Maggots
mean that life’s still leaking.
It’s like magic
when his dead voice
is nauseating
and I can’t see him
so he might as well be invisible.
It’s like magic when he isn’t
and doesn’t have anything to say
and I can’t bear to listen anyway
so I just recognize my fingers / all
the injuries they’ve inflicted
while my skin drops off.
What’s worse than a maggot
in the EAT ME
GLOVE-BOX DATES?
Does the 5-second rule apply
to something that drops dead?
Is it true he might come back
and crack open a piñata
blue alcopops, bombay mix, karaoke, and a pint of nostalgia
which is like thinking in another language,
I mean, how it feels, not what it means.
Half a maggot, the memory of
mange marching across his fur
describes a lot of other feelings
the feeling that someone else is taking up the whole room
the feeling that no one could help me now
or ever whether I was on several edges
my hot core and noggin facing this hammering world
of brainlessness and sweetbreads
was always a favorite word.
I don’t know what it tastes like but I know it’s terrible.
a:ldskjfa:lkdgjsa
meaning
I’m so overcharged
that all I can do is literally slam
my hands / head / breasts against the keyboard.
Wherever there are
corpses there are maggots.
If we dig him up will he be wearing a jacket?
LOOK OUT
for the milkier, gentler solaces
which for all we know                   for all we know
could be the wind
or Chopin’s noise (still hammering the background) —
who’s seen it? Only its aftermath
is visible what’s not visible
is the aftermath of my screaming
 
 
20
you can catch me on the
     FLOOR / DOG / SYRINGE
periphery of the dying
and dead scene
     FACE (FEMALE)
maybe my whole life
carting sensations to the center
mopping shit up with towels
     SKULL / COFFIN
(there are feelings for these things)
while public petting
     CAR / PLANE / ROCKET
bodies leak it’s no surprise what I give away
     ONE DROPLET
you can have when the vet twirls off to deal
with some bloody business in a kitchen
     KNIFE / GUN
the hug-a-corpse scene gets deep in
the hold of what I am
     PARTY POPPER / WASTEBIN
is what I’ve not yet been
 
 
30
Who concocts the smell
of dogs which smells like
an extreme close-up
of the world oozing
in at the edges.
Full as an ice cube is full of liquid.
I mistook it for solidity.
The world is too full of smells.
Though it’s impossible
to see the top of it
they crawl between my legs
in the shimmering fuzz
on top of the plant
stickers of evenings
tongues held out
pocket-friendly air fresheners
strikes on our nostrils.
They come at me streaming.
Why the dog? Why not
the dog? Was it only a dream
of soil heating held
and stimulated
for his unique aroma.
It’s not a way in
but it places you somewhere
that smells strong
and looks strong leaving
behind us. Hi.
~~~
High at the window in her cage         The old canary flits and sings, Nor sees across the curtain pass    The shadow of a swallow’s wings. A poor deceit and copy, this,    Of larger lives that mark their span, Unreckoning of wider worlds    Or gifts that Heaven keeps for man. She gathers piteous bits and shreds,    This solitary, mateless thing, To patient build again the nest    So rudely scattered spring by spring; And sings her brief, unlisted songs,    Her dreams of bird life wild and free, Yet never beats her prison bars    At sound of song from bush or tree. But in my busiest hours I pause,    Held by a sense of urgent speech, Bewildered by that spark-like soul,    Able my very soul to reach. She will be heard; she chirps me loud,    When I forget those gravest cares, Her small provision to supply,    Clear water or her seedsman’s wares. She begs me now for that chief joy    The round great world is made to grow,— Her wisp of greenness. Hear her chide,    Because my answering thought is slow! What can my life seem like to her?    A dull, unpunctual service mine; Stupid before her eager call,    Her flitting steps, her insight fine. To open wide thy prison door,    Poor friend, would give thee to thy foes; And yet a plaintive note I hear,    As if to tell how slowly goes The time of thy long prisoning.    Bird! does some promise keep thee sane? Will there be better days for thee?    Will thy soul too know life again? Ah, none of us have more than this:    If one true friend green leaves can reach From out some fairer, wider place,    And understand our wistful speech!
~~~
My lover, who lives far away, opens the door to my room
         and offers supper in a bowl made of his breath.
The stew has boiled and I wonder at the cat born from its steam.
The cat is in the bedroom now, mewling. The cat is indecent
          and I, who am trying to be tidy, I, who am trying to do things
          the proper way, I, who am sick from the shedding, I am undone.
My lover, who lives far away, opens the door to my room
          and offers pastries in a basket spun from his vision.
It is closely woven, the kind of container some women collect.
I have seen these in many colors, but the basket he brings is simple:
      only black, only nude. The basket he brings is full of sweet scones
       and I eat even the crumbs. As if I've not dined for days.
My lover, who lives far away, opens the door to my room
        and offers tea made from the liquid he's crying.
I do not want my lover crying and I am sorry I ever asked for tea.
My lover, who lives far away, opens the door to my room pretending
        he never cried. He offers tea and cold cakes. The tea is delicious:
        spiced like the start of our courtship, honeyed and warm.
I drink every bit of the tea and put aside the rest.
My lover, who lives far away, opens the door to my room
         like a man loving his strength. The lock I replaced
         this morning will not keep him away.
My lover, who lives far away, opens the door to my room
         and brings me nothing.
Perhaps he has noticed how fat I've grown, indulged.
Perhaps he is poor and sick of emptying his store.
It is no matter to me any longer, he has filled me, already, so full.
My lover who is far away opens the door to my room
         and tells me he is tired.
I do not ask what he's tired from for my lover, far away,
          has already disappeared.
The blankets are big with his body. The cat, under the covers,
          because it is cold out and she is not stupid, mews.
~~~
The dogs eat hoof slivers and lie under the porch.
A strand of human hair hangs strangely from a fruit tree
like a cry in the throat. The sky is clay for the child who is past
being tired, who wanders in waist-deep
grasses. Gnats rise in a vapor,
in a long mounting whine around her forehead and ears.
The sun is an indistinct moon. Frail sticks
of grass poke her ankles,
and a wet froth of spiders touches her legs
like wet fingers. The musk and smell
of air are as hot as the savory
terrible exhales from a tired horse.
The parents are sleeping all afternoon,
and no one explains the long uneasy afternoons.
She hears their combined breathing and swallowing
salivas, and sees their sides rising and falling
like the sides of horses in the hot pasture.
At evening a breeze dries and crumbles
the sky and the clouds float like undershirts
and cotton dresses on a clothesline. Horses
rock to their feet and race or graze.
Parents open their shutters and call
the lonely, happy child home.
The child who hates silences talks and talks
of cicadas and the manes of horses.
~~~
Close to thedoor inmy dream thesmall signsI saw a brownsign with wisdomon itI saw a brownone leaningwith wisdomon itfringe of a mirrormy mother leaning over a pondcupping waterleaning againstthe mouldingcardboard or wood which materials do youdoes your wisdom preferwhich a-partment in a summerwith someone I felt brave tohave touched her love the screendoor and the dogsand the cats alwaysgetting out. Thatwas the feartwo signsfading but recallingthey had faded like wordsfade in stone becauseof the rain and the daysand waking and the dreamis leaving with everystep leaning over the meatbecause I do not want you to have died in vainkissing the turkey and the neck of  my dogall animals am I. all dreams, all stoneall message am I.
~~~
I bring the cat’s body home from the vet’s in a running-shoe box held shut with elastic bands. Then I clean the corners where she has eaten and slept, scrubbing the hard bits of food from the baseboard, dumping the litter and blasting the pan with a hose. The plastic dishes I hide in the basement, the pee- soaked towel I put in the trash. I put the catnip mouse in the box and I put the box away, too, in a deep dirt drawer in the earth. When the death-energy leaves me, I go to the room where my daughter slept in nursery school, grammar school, high school, I lie on her milky bedspread and think of the day I left her at college, how nothing could keep me from gouging the melted candle-wax out from between her floorboards, or taking a razor blade to the decal that said to the firemen, “Break this window first.” I close my eyes now and enter a place that’s clearly expecting me, swaddled in loss and then losing that, too, as I move from room to bone-white room in the house of the rest of my life.
~~~
Butch once remarked to me how sinister it was   
alone, after hours, in the dark of the shop
to find me there hunched over two weeks’ accounts   
probably smoked like a bacon from all those Pall-Malls.
Odd comfort when the light goes, the case lights left on   
and the rings of baloney, the herring, the parsley,   
arranged in the strict, familiar ways.
Whatever intactness holds animals up
has been carefully taken, what’s left are the parts.   
Just look in the cases, all counted and stacked.
Step-and-a-Half Waleski used to come to the shop
and ask for the cheap cut, she would thump, sniff, and finger.   
This one too old. This one here for my supper.   
Two days and you do notice change in the texture.
I have seen them the day before slaughter.
Knowing the outcome from the moment they enter   
the chute, the eye rolls, blood is smeared on the lintel.   
Mallet or bullet they lunge toward their darkness.
But something queer happens when the heart is delivered.   
When a child is born, sometimes the left hand is stronger.   
You can train it to fail, still the knowledge is there.   
That is the knowledge in the hand of a butcher
that adds to its weight. Otto Kröger could fell
a dray horse with one well-placed punch to the jaw,   
and yet it is well known how thorough he was.
He never sat down without washing his hands,   
and he was a maker, his sausage was echt
so that even Waleski had little complaint.   
Butch once remarked there was no one so deft   
as my Otto. So true, there is great tact involved   
in parting the flesh from the bones that it loves.
How we cling to the bones. Each joint is a web
of small tendons and fibers. He knew what I meant   
when I told him I felt something pull from the left,   
and how often it clouded the day before slaughter.
Something queer happens when the heart is delivered.
~~~
They are a gift I have wanted again.
Wanted: One moment in mountains
when winter got so cold
the oil froze before it could burn.
I chopped ferns of hoarfrost from all the windows
and peered up at pines, a wedding cake
by a baker gone mad. Swirls by the thousand
shimmered above me until a cloud
lumbered over a ridge,
bringing the heavier white of more flurries.
I believed, I believed, I believed
it would last, that when you went out
to test the black ice or to dig out a Volkswagon
filled with rich women, you’d return
and we’d sputter like oil,
match after match, warm in the making.
Wisconsin’s flat farmland never approved:
I hid in cornfields far into October,
listening to music that whirled from my thumbprint.
When sunset played havoc with bright leaves of alders,
I never mentioned longing or fear.
I crouched like a good refugee in brown creeks
and forgot why Autumn is harder than Spring.
But snug on the western slope of that mountain
I’d accept every terror, break open seals
to release love’s headwaters to unhurried sunlight.
Weren’t we Big Hearts? Through some trick of silver
we held one another, believing each motion the real one,
ah, lover, why were dark sources bundled up
in our eyes? Each owned an agate,
marbled with anguish, a heart or its echo,
we hardly knew. Lips touching lips,
did that break my horizon
as much as those horses broke my belief?
You drove off and I walked the old road,
scolding the doubles that wanted so much.
The chestnut mare whinnied a cloud into scrub pine.
In a windless corner of a corral,
four horses fit like puzzle pieces.
Their dark eyes and lashes defined by the white.
The colt kicked his hind, loped from the fence.
The mares and a stallion galloped behind,
lifting and leaping, finding each other
in full accord with the earth and their bodies.
No harm ever touched them once they cut loose,
snorting at flurries falling again.
How little our chances for feeling ourselves.
They vanished so quickly—one flick of a tail.
Where do their mountains and moments begin?
I stood a long time in sharpening wind.
 
~~~
I do not understand the poets who tell me that I should not personify. Every morning the willow auditions for a new role outside my bedroom window—today she is Clytemnestra; yesterday a Southern Belle, lost in her own melodrama, sinking on her skirts. Nor do I like the mathematicians who tell me I cannot say, "The zinnias are counting on their fingers," or "The dog is practicing her geometry," even though every day I watch her using the yard's big maple as the apex of a triangle from which she bisects the circumference of the lawn until she finds the place where the rabbit has escaped, or the squirrel upped the ante by climbing into a new Euclidian plane. She stumbles across the lawn, eyes pulling her feet along, gaze fixed on a rodent working the maze of the oak as if it were his own invention, her feet tangling in the roots of trees, and tripping, yes, even over themselves, until I go out to assist, by pointing at the squirrel, and repeating, "There! There!" But instead of following my outstretched arm to the crown of the tree, where the animal is now lounging under a canopy of leaves, catching its breath, charting its next escape, she looks to my mouth, eager to read my lips, confident that I—who can bring her home from across the field with a word, who can speak for the willow and the zinnia— can surely charm a squirrel down from a tree.
~~~
She considers a field. She considers a field and buys it. Let her have the fruit of her hands.
 
We come down from the mountains. Yellow trees, green trees. I was leaving Earth but, before I did, I had to get rid of all my animals. My main one, my main model for behavior, was my snake. He was attached to the bottom of my foot but had become dangerous seeming and I was afraid he would bite me if he got the chance. My sister was there and I said, “Before I leave, I have to get rid of all my animals,” thinking maybe she’d help me. I said, “My horse, my frog, my snake…” but didn’t mention I was worried about how to dislodge my snake safely. As I was waking up, I thought of going to a place where they could give the snake a shot to knock it out or even kill it before they tried to get it off my foot. Which seemed like a pretty good idea, though inconvenient.
~~~
For months my daughter carried
a dead monarch in a quart mason jar.
To and from school in her backpack,
to her only friend’s house.   At the dinner table
it sat like a guest alongside the pot roast.
She took it to bed, propped by her pillow.
Was it the year her brother was born?
Was this her own too-fragile baby
that had lived—so briefly—in its glassed world?
Or the year she refused to go to her father’s house?
Was this the holding-her-breath girl she became there?
This plump child in her rolled-down socks
I sometimes wanted to haul back inside me
and carry safe again.   What was her fierce
commitment?   I never understood.
We just lived with the dead winged thing
as part of her, as part of us,
weightless in its heavy jar.
~~~
Winter. Time to eat fat
and watch hockey. In the pewter mornings, the cat,
a black fur sausage with yellow
Houdini eyes, jumps up on the bed and tries
to get onto my head. It’s his
way of telling whether or not I’m dead.
If I’m not, he wants to be scratched; if I am
He’ll think of something. He settles
on my chest, breathing his breath
of burped-up meat and musty sofas,
purring like a washboard. Some other tomcat,
not yet a capon, has been spraying our front door,
declaring war. It’s all about sex and territory,
which are what will finish us off
in the long run. Some cat owners around here
should snip a few testicles. If we wise
hominids were sensible, we’d do that too,
or eat our young, like sharks.
But it’s love that does us in. Over and over
again, He shoots, he scores! and famine
crouches in the bedsheets, ambushing the pulsing
eiderdown, and the windchill factor hits
thirty below, and pollution pours
out of our chimneys to keep us warm.
February, month of despair,
with a skewered heart in the centre.
I think dire thoughts, and lust for French fries
with a splash of vinegar.
Cat, enough of your greedy whining
and your small pink bumhole.
Off my face! You’re the life principle,
more or less, so get going
on a little optimism around here.
Get rid of death. Celebrate increase. Make it be spring.
~~~
You could grow into it,  that sense of living like a dog,  loyal to being on your own in the fur of your skin,  able to exist only for the sake of existing.  Nothing inside your head lasting long enough for you to hold onto,  you watch your own thoughts leap across your own synapses and disappear— small boats in a wind,         fliers in all that blue,                 the swish of an arm backed with feathers,  a dress talking in a corner,                 and then poof,         your mind clean as a dog’s,  your body big as the world,         important with accident—                blood or a limp, fur and paws.  You swell into survival,         you take up the whole day,  you’re all there is,         everything else is  not you, is every passing glint, is         shadows brought to you by wind,                 passing into a bird’s cheep, replaced by a                                rabbit skittering across a yard,  a void you yourself fall into.  You could make this beautiful,         but you don’t need to,  living is this fleshy side of the bone,         going on is this medicinal smell of the sun—                no dog ever tires of seeing his life  keep showing up at the back door  even as a rotting bone with a bad smell;  feet tottering, he dreams of it,  wakes and licks no matter what.
~~~
When the mule balked, he hit him
sometimes with the flat of a hand
upside the head; more often
the stick he carried did its angry trick.
The mule’s job was to power the press,
iron on iron that wrung the sugar
out of cane, circling under the coarse
beam attached to his shoulders and neck.
That mule of my childhood
was black, remained blackly obedient
as round and round he made himself
the splintered hand of a clock, the groan
and squeak of machinery chewing
the reedy stalks to pulp, each second
delivering another sweet thin drop
into the black pot at the center.
He hit him with a rag, old headrag,
but the animal winced only with the thrash
of a cane stalk itself—he squinted
under the rule of that bamboo.
The sun was another caning
on his black-hot flesh. He was slow
as the blackstrap syrup the boiled sugar made,
so true to the circle he dragged
we hardly saw him. We loved the rustling
house of green cane, blind in that field
of tropical grasses whose white plumes
announced the long season’s wait.
We yearned for the six-foot stem, the eventual
six pieces the machete sliced
at the joints, then the woody exterior
peeled back lengthwise with a blade.
It was a black hand we waited for, his job
to lay bare the grainy fiber we chewed.
That juice on our tongues
was his sweetness at work.
Chester was his name, he kept the mule.
~~~
Louisiana skies paddle north nodding hello to some exiles displaced by floodwaters so we all putter in the bisque in fretted dresses, alleviated by a fan. But we have nothing on "Le Matin," in whose rococo frame a curtain sweeps to bare a boudoir, a Bichon Frisé worrying something between paws, begging the dulcet glance of the mistress whose push-up, cupless corset and up-drawn stocking border what they fall short of, per the stern frame rippling like a cloud! Even the candle angles to get a look in the mirror engloving the scene. Why it is her slipper the bitch clutches!   The gentleman's reverie is elsewhere . . . Loitering Louisiana stops to admire this engraving by "N. Lavreinee." What a chevalier! It makes the smeariest sunset think it's in a Restoration Comedy, in such humidity chefs defer meringues. "Ksar Rouge," "Taos Adobe," "Gulf Shrimp"—a thousand names of softboiled lipsticks fritter English as if it were French, meaning meeting no resistance from the flesh.
~~~
I show her how to put her arms around me,   
but she’s much too small.
What’s worse, she doesn’t understand.   
And
although she lies beside me, sticking   
out her tongue, it’s herself she licks.
She likes my stroking hand.   
And
even lets me kiss.
But at my demand:
“Now, do it to me, like this,”   
she backs off with a hiss.
What’s in her little mind?
Jumping off the bed,
she shows me her behind,
but curls up on the rug instead.
I beg her to return. At first, she did,   
then went and hid
under the covers. She’s playing with my feet!   
“Oh, Boa, come back. Be sweet,
Lie against me here where I’m nice and warm.   
Settle down. Don’t claw, don’t bite.
Stay with me tonight.”
Seeming to consent, she gives a little whine.
Her deep, deep pupils meet mine   
with a look that holds a flood ...   
But not my brand.
Not at all.
And,
what‘s worse, she’s much too small.
~~~
When the snake bit
Rabbi Hanina ben Dosa
while he was praying
the snake died. (Each day
is attended by surprises
or it is nothing.)
Question: was the bare-footed,
smelly Rabbi more poisonous
than the snake
or so God-adulterated
he’d become immune
to serpent poison?
Oh great-great-great-uncles,
your palms weighing air,
why are you arguing?
Listen, the snake thought
(being old and unwell
and bad-tempered as hell)
Death, where’s thy sting?
In short, was just testing:
a snake’s last fling.
Yes, the so-called snake
was dying anyway, its heart
calcified and as old as Eden.
No, that snake was A1 fit
but while hissing for fun it
clumsily bit its own tongue.
No, Hanina invented that snake;
not for his own sake but for first-
class, religious publicity.
No no, here’s the key to it.
Ask: did the Rabbi, later on,
become a jumpy, timid man?
Remember, he who has been bitten
by a snake thereafter becomes
frightened of a rope …
Bearded men in darkening rooms
sipping lemon tea and arguing
about the serpent till the moon
of Russia, of Latvia, Lithuania,
Poland, rose above the alien
steeples—centuries of sleep.
Now, tonight, a clean-shaven rabbi
who once studied in Vienna
says snake-venom contains
haemolysins, haemo-
coagulants, protolysins,
cytolysins and neurotoxins
and that even in Hanina
ben Dosa’s day a snake was a
snake—unless, of course, it was
a penis, an unruly penis,
making a noise like one pissing
on a mound of fresh hot ashes.
Oh great-great-great-uncles
did you hear him? And are your
handbones weighing moonshine?
~~~
We chose this animal to be our pet.
His indifference allowed us to sleep.
Cat, who made your ears bend back,
who made you lazy as quick?
Who made you work?
It is a wonder any sun is left.
Still it is always so abrupt.
Sleep like an umbrella going up,
clumsy like a broken umbrella coming down,
this waking, and into what?
I did not ask to be afraid.
I did not ask for pleasure, but there it was,
it exfoliated at its own leisure,
grew until it was all that was—
The brief interruption of who I am
interrupts and punctuates the day
I always assumed that I would share—
Cat who cut the sun down from the sky
and then responsible put it up again?
There must be one of us that you prefer.
~~~
Noon, March 6, 1997
 



From morning’s mouth
the bones emerge,
a prayer is whispered
over rounded horns;
the prairie is beyond
the quivering hump
and holy smoke sparkles
released in the breath.
Braided sweetgrass,
be about their hooves;
although the grip of hunger
lies heavy on the land,
let endless native grasses grow
among the yellow stones
and between the stars.
Even if only one man had
begun to sing, actually
it was thousands, She who came
to Wisconsin farmers
and transformed their lives,
She who brought her blessing
in the form of being newborn,
She whom they named the Miracle,
White Buffalo Calf Maiden must return
amid the fast firing of bullets, along
the most perilous of paths. Rock stars,
millionaires, they all offered millions of dollars
to struggling white farmers
but she had begun her transformation and her prophecy
by touching them and they came to understand
if not the actual words to the prayers
at least the reverence, the need
to protect, to keep the doors open.
Like it was a hundred years ago
bounties are gathered from death;
trains, buses, cars, planes
carry the segmented body of the terrible worm
across the land and the screams of the hunted
split the sun awake. It is time to restore
the stolen beads and shards,
the bones and knives to every grave.
And the graves are graves no longer but wombs;
the bounties burn their hands
and bones come flowing
from museum shelves
to dance in the rippling grass,
rebuilding lungs, starting hearts.
                                              There must be a hundred men
                                              and a hundred men’s worth
                                              of heartlessness; wished they could find
                                              Indians to kill but now that is illegal
                                              so they make up some excuse
                                              to raise their rifles and take aim,
                                              not hearing the rumble
                                              of buffalo prayer, not feeling
                                              tomorrow tremble
                                              or the prophecy of Miracle,
                                              and smile as they see the legs give way,
                                              the horns gouge open the prairie ground,
                                              Earth betrayed again.
~~~
M loved the little house she shared with her mum, its magnolias and mansard roof. Inside, the smell of molasses and ginger had sunk into the timbers. Water mumbled from a hand pump, not a faucet tap. Music murmured, not from a radio, but from a soft piano. All was washed to softness—the sheets, the table linens. Even the gold rims on the old dishes were brushed down to a blur.
     M had been a surprise late baby, and her mother was almost the age of a grandmother. There were only the two of them—plus Maugie, their cat.
     M grew up thinking she understood her mum. But in fact she only understood her in daylight. The night world was where mum paced with her mountains of money worries. Down the hall M blissfully slept, and down in the basement Maugie moused, bringing her prizes up to the landing so M and Mum could find them first thing in the morning.
     And in the morning light Mum’s money misery vanished. She never spoke of it. But when Mum got sick, her worries magnified. Her illness brought the night world to daylight, though she still managed to hide it from her daughter. Mum could no longer hope for a miracle. Unbeknownst to M, just before Mum died, the ancient lady up and took misfortune into her own misguided hands. She sold their home to the neighbors who had always coveted it.
     Why didn’t she tell me? M plagued herself with questions all through the small funeral—she and her mum were the last of their line—and said to her distant cousins and her friends: She never ever mentioned money! Lawyers, real estate agents, and the neighbors of course were summoned. But the deal was done. Though M harbored murder in her heart for those greedy neighbors, she couldn’t get the house back.
     It’s all MY fault—I should have known, M moaned.
     It took a long time for her to settle these affairs. She’d taken a leave from her job at the museum, but eventually she had to go back to work. She and Maugie went to the only place M could afford to buy, a small but gleaming condominium. How could she transfer doilies and dusty velvet couches with broken legs into this glare? What was home any more? She had an iron bedstead, not a sleek futon. Of course Maugie kept finding her way back to the old homestead, and M had to keep quashing the mayhem in her heart as she retrieved the crafty little animal from that basement now full of the neighbor’s traps instead of mice.
     Up in the condo, M’s dreams began. Each night she dreamed of a ruined house. Mornings she woke to a smell like something left in an oven too long, a whiff of burnt molasses. Sometimes in a dream a window without a wall fell to the ground in mockery. Night after night in her sleep M shouldered mountains of blame. But then came morning.
     All she could do was embrace the day. With her long shapely arms, she put on her makeup, donned her mackintosh, and struck out for the museum, determined to muddle through.
     “It’s not my fault, I know,” she said to McM, the man who occupied the next desk. “I just miss my home.” He offered her a meatloaf sandwich. She said, “I never knew my mum, after all.” M’s dreams went on mortgaging her nights. When she startled awake, there was only Maugie at the foot of the iron bedstead squeaking an unsatisfactory plastic rodent, and a monstrous stink of burnt molasses and cat pee.
     M decided to bake. Using her mother’s measuring cups, she chased the aftermaths of the dreams away by spicing the smells. With cinnamon, with allspice, with vanilla and cardamom, she made muffins, mousse, and meringues in the open-concept kitchen. She used all her mother’s bowls, and all her mother’s spoons, to expunge the smells—and she almost did.
     Meanwhile, Maugie knew whenever workmen propped open a staircase door. The cat would slip into the hall, then escape down the stairwell through the service door. And M would get a call at the museum from the mingy mean-spirited neighbors.
     “And what am I going to do with Maugie?” M moaned to McM.
     “Your cat is lonely,” he said. “Does she have service potential?”
     Maugie would be tested. McM agreed to help.
      The minute McM walked into the combo of gleam and old wood and velvet and iron, the marvelous smells wrapped around him. “You’ve been baking,” he murmured approvingly, “in your farmhouse in the sky.” But M was busy wrangling Maugie into the carrier.
     Shortly the cat was deposited on the welcoming laps of ancient ladies in wheelchairs. That champion purr eased the ladies’ hearts. Maugie aced the test. Seeing the ladies, something in M eased, too.
     “My mother is a mystery I may never solve,” she said to McM on one of their lunchtime trips to the old ladies. Maugie now went willingly into her carrier.
     And so the bright weekday activities wore down the mountains of dreams. Blame became a molehill. M’s nightmares became so predictable they were almost friendly. Metamorphosis set in. McM lingered when he held M’s coat, and she lingered as he slipped it on. Their hands met when they put the cat carrier into the car. But these were the gestures of daylight.
     Thinking she was ready to brave the evening light, M had made the mistake of inviting McM for Saturday dinner. When the day came, she lay in bed with a fever, vacuuming was abandoned, her mahogany hair unwashed. Though the mushroom soup gurgled on the stove and the mousse slept in the fridge, the main course had never been started. She left a message canceling.
     McM arrived anyway with merlot and magnolias. He merged into M’s mess. It smelled of cough drops and kitty litter and dust and the fragrance of a woman in a slept-in nightgown. She slid beneath layers of consciousness like the layers of the blankets he straightened for her. And then balancing two hot toddies, fully clothed, he climbed into the bed. Maugie obliged him with a space.
     M was too weak to protest. She woke and drank and woke and slept. At midnight M sat up and slurped the mushroom soup held by McM. Magnificent . . . 
     And then she sank. That night of course she dreamed of a house, but this house was merely old, not ruined. It was the homestead, magnolias laden, sheet music still in the piano bench. When she woke, she smelled McM, still fully clothed at her side, his glasses on the floor, batted about by Maugie. Nothing smelled burnt. Unlike her mother, M didn’t believe in miracles. She believed in muddling through. Slowly something had risen in her, like those moons you sometimes see in an afternoon sky, night inside the persistence of day. M sat up in bed, hugging her knees, looking at McM sprawled beside her. The house at last is inside me, she thought. I’ve finally moved. 
 
~~~
An arty feline couple parodies bourgeois gender roles and literary values before the days of  YouTube.
~~~
I prefer
warm fur,
a perfect fire
to lie beside,
a cozy lap
where I can nap,
an empty chair
when she's not there.
I want heat
     on my feet
     on my nose
     on my hide.
No cat I remember
dislikes December
     inside.
~~~
Ours was a play-filled childhood; irrigation ditches ran deep
during the summers. We played in the water and dirt, then inscribed
ABCs and numbers onto the smooth ground. Our cat Polly died
of rabies; then all the pets had to be shot, some in the rib cage
as they thrashed in panic. There was a pink bruise
on my forehead from pressing against the wall. We couldn't figure
 
out how such a thing could happen. The dogs were steadfast figures
around the farm. They chased strange cars and sometimes invoked deep
panic among visitors and passersby. They had cuts and bruises
from scuffles with roaming packs. No tags were inscribed
with their random Navajo names. Snazzy was skinny; his rib cage
obvious through thin fur. He looked as if he might die
 
from hunger, but he ate like nobody's business. Who knew he would die
of rabies with the rest? The main thing was to figure
out how they contracted it, my parents said. We cried until our rib cages
ached; our eyes stayed swollen. This first loss was too deep
to even talk about. Decades later, I can finally describe
how that summer led us into a grief that felt like a bruise
 
that would last forever. But our neighbor suffered worse bruises:
their huge dog, named Dog, was the first to die
and was the cause of all this. Their home and fields are inscribed
in our memories as "the rabies place." Over time, they must have figured
it was too much to live down. Childhood losses run deep,
even though we are grandparents now. The memory is an invisible cage
 
of anguished sobs, gunshots, yelping howls, canine rib cages
exploding. Sometimes we reminisce and notice that the bruises
of grief have turned pale like smoothed-over scars. That initial deep
hurt was the start, we found, of how love could die
right before us, even as we watched: stunned figures
pleading for mercy, urgent prayers saying, "Let God's scribe
 
mark this down. We've paid our dues. Our hearts are inscribed
with loss after loss." For some reason, after everything, our rib cages
held up and continued to cradle tender hearts. They must have figured
that all the prayers and careful teachings would prevent bruises
that would weaken us. Our love for those homely animals was deep
 
and would figure in the knowledge that such bruises
aren't endless, and that our rib cages are not mere bones. One can die
from grief, so now we can describe loss and love as the Holy Twins.
~~~
When you hear me singing
you get the rifle down
and the flashlight, aiming for my brain,
but you always miss
and when you set out the poison
I piss on it
to warn the others.
You think: That one’s too clever,
she’s dangerous,
~~~
This is what you changed me to:
a greypink vegetable with slug
eyes, buttock
incarnate, spreading like a slow turnip,
a skin you stuff so you may feed
in your turn, a stinking wart
of flesh, a large tuber
of blood which munches
and bloats. Very well then. Meanwhile
I have the sky, which is only half
caged, I have my weed corners,
I keep myself busy, singing
my song of roots and noses,
my song of dung. Madame,
this song offends you, these grunts
which you find oppressively sexual,
mistaking simple greed for lust.
I am yours. If you feed me garbage,
I will sing a song of garbage.
This is a hymn.
~~~
1
I keep placing my hands over
my face, the fingertips just
resting on the place where I feel
my eyebrows and the fine end
of a bone. My eyes are covered
with the blood of my hands, my
palms hold
my jaws. I do this at dinner.
My daughter asksAre you all right?
and by a common miracle
when I smile
she knows I am.
             2
I ask her what she will do
after we eat. Sleep she
tells me. But I will clean
the deer skull, wash it.
             3
You gave me this skull in the woods
told me to bring it clean
and tell the story I had told you
before, about how the deer had
come to me, and I said I would.
             4
And I put this skull on an old
newspaper, pulled the lower part
of the jaws free, touched it first
carefully, as if it would fall apart
in my hands, the bone paper-
thin, and then I saw I could
scrub, so brushed the surface with
steel and my fingers and more
and more this surface became
familiar to me.
             5
I wanted to see the lines of it
what it would be if it had been
polished by the wind, the water,
and my hands, these agents making
the skull more itself.
Slowly I was not afraid at all
and my fingers went into the deepest
holes of this thing, not afraid
for myself or it, feeling
suddenly as if cleaning this
small fragment of earth away
from the crevices inside was
like loving.
            6
But it was when I touched the place
where the eyes were that I knew
this was the shell of the deer that had
lived here, this was this deer
and not this deer, her home and
now empty of her, but not
empty of her, I knew also, not
empty of her, as my hands
trembled.
            7
And in that instant remembered you
had been in that body of
that deer dying, what
does it feel like to be a deer
dying, the death consumes
you like birth, you are
nowhere else but in the center.
            8
Remembering those gentle deer
that watched me as I wept,
or the deer that leapt as if
out of my mind, when I saw
speaking there in that green place
the authority of the heart
and the deer of the woods where
my feet stood, stared at me until
I whispered to her and cried
at her presence.
            9
And when I cleaned the skull
I washed myself and sat
my body half out of the water
and put my hands again over
my face, my fingers edging the
bone over my eyes, and I thought
how good this feels and this
is a gesture you make.
            10
Tell this story of the deer’s skull
you asked quietly and so I
came in my own time to put
these words carefully here
slowly listing each motion
on this thin paper
as fragile and as tough
as knowledge.
               1978
~~~
In that country the animals
have the faces of people:
the ceremonial
cats possessing the streets
the fox run
politely to earth, the huntsmen
standing around him, fixed
in their tapestry of manners
the bull, embroidered
with blood and given
an elegant death, trumpets, his name
stamped on him, heraldic brand
because
(when he rolled
on the sand, sword in his heart, the teeth
in his blue mouth were human)
he is really a man
even the wolves, holding resonant
conversations in their
forests thickened with legend.
            In this country the animals
            have the faces of
            animals.
            Their eyes
            flash once in car headlights
            and are gone.
            Their deaths are not elegant.
            They have the faces of
            no-one.
~~~
My mother—preferring the strange to the tame:
Dove-note, bone marrow, deer dung,
Frog’s belly distended with finny young,
Leaf-mold wilderness, harebell, toadstool,
Odd, small snakes roving through the leaves,
Metallic beetles rambling over stones: all
Wild and natural!—flashed out her instinctive love, and quick, she   
Picked up the fluttering, bleeding bat the cat laid at her feet,   
And held the little horror to the mirror, where
He gazed on himself, and shrieked like an old screen door far off.
Depended from her pinched thumb, each wing
Came clattering down like a small black shutter.
Still tranquil, she began, “It’s rather sweet ...”
The soft mouse body, the hard feral glint
In the caught eyes. Then we saw,
And recoiled: lice, pallid, yellow,
Nested within the wing-pits, cozily sucked and snoozed.   
The thing dropped from her hands, and with its thud,
Swiftly, the cat, with a clean careful mouth
Closed on the soiled webs, growling, took them out to the back stoop.
But still, dark blood, a sticky puddle on the floor   
Remained, of all my mother’s tender, wounding passion   
For a whole wild, lost, betrayed, and secret life   
Among its dens and burrows, its clean stones,   
Whose denizens can turn upon the world   
With spitting tongue, an odor, talon, claw,   
To sting or soil benevolence, alien
As our clumsy traps, our random scatter of shot.   
She swept to the kitchen. Turning on the tap,   
She washed and washed the pity from her hands.
~~~
Morning and eveningMaids heard the goblins cry:“Come buy our orchard fruits,Come buy, come buy:Apples and quinces,Lemons and oranges,Plump unpeck’d cherries,Melons and raspberries,Bloom-down-cheek’d peaches,Swart-headed mulberries,Wild free-born cranberries,Crab-apples, dewberries,Pine-apples, blackberries,Apricots, strawberries;—All ripe togetherIn summer weather,—Morns that pass by,Fair eves that fly;Come buy, come buy:Our grapes fresh from the vine,Pomegranates full and fine,Dates and sharp bullaces,Rare pears and greengages,Damsons and bilberries,Taste them and try:Currants and gooseberries,Bright-fire-like barberries,Figs to fill your mouth,Citrons from the South,Sweet to tongue and sound to eye;Come buy, come buy.”
         Evening by eveningAmong the brookside rushes,Laura bow’d her head to hear,Lizzie veil’d her blushes:Crouching close togetherIn the cooling weather,With clasping arms and cautioning lips,With tingling cheeks and finger tips.“Lie close,” Laura said,Pricking up her golden head:“We must not look at goblin men,We must not buy their fruits:Who knows upon what soil they fedTheir hungry thirsty roots?”“Come buy,” call the goblinsHobbling down the glen.“Oh,” cried Lizzie, “Laura, Laura,You should not peep at goblin men.”Lizzie cover’d up her eyes,Cover’d close lest they should look;Laura rear’d her glossy head,And whisper’d like the restless brook:“Look, Lizzie, look, Lizzie,Down the glen tramp little men.One hauls a basket,One bears a plate,One lugs a golden dishOf many pounds weight.How fair the vine must growWhose grapes are so luscious;How warm the wind must blowThrough those fruit bushes.”“No,” said Lizzie, “No, no, no;Their offers should not charm us,Their evil gifts would harm us.”She thrust a dimpled fingerIn each ear, shut eyes and ran:Curious Laura chose to lingerWondering at each merchant man.One had a cat’s face,One whisk’d a tail,One tramp’d at a rat’s pace,One crawl’d like a snail,One like a wombat prowl’d obtuse and furry,One like a ratel tumbled hurry skurry.She heard a voice like voice of dovesCooing all together:They sounded kind and full of lovesIn the pleasant weather.
         Laura stretch’d her gleaming neckLike a rush-imbedded swan,Like a lily from the beck,Like a moonlit poplar branch,Like a vessel at the launchWhen its last restraint is gone.
         Backwards up the mossy glenTurn’d and troop’d the goblin men,With their shrill repeated cry,“Come buy, come buy.”When they reach’d where Laura wasThey stood stock still upon the moss,Leering at each other,Brother with queer brother;Signalling each other,Brother with sly brother.One set his basket down,One rear’d his plate;One began to weave a crownOf tendrils, leaves, and rough nuts brown(Men sell not such in any town);One heav’d the golden weightOf dish and fruit to offer her:“Come buy, come buy,” was still their cry.Laura stared but did not stir,Long’d but had no money:The whisk-tail’d merchant bade her tasteIn tones as smooth as honey,The cat-faced purr’d,The rat-faced spoke a wordOf welcome, and the snail-paced even was heard;One parrot-voiced and jollyCried “Pretty Goblin” still for “Pretty Polly;”—One whistled like a bird.
         But sweet-tooth Laura spoke in haste:“Good folk, I have no coin;To take were to purloin:I have no copper in my purse,I have no silver either,And all my gold is on the furzeThat shakes in windy weatherAbove the rusty heather.”“You have much gold upon your head,”They answer’d all together:“Buy from us with a golden curl.”She clipp’d a precious golden lock,She dropp’d a tear more rare than pearl,Then suck’d their fruit globes fair or red:Sweeter than honey from the rock,Stronger than man-rejoicing wine,Clearer than water flow’d that juice;She never tasted such before,How should it cloy with length of use?She suck’d and suck’d and suck’d the moreFruits which that unknown orchard bore;She suck’d until her lips were sore;Then flung the emptied rinds awayBut gather’d up one kernel stone,And knew not was it night or dayAs she turn’d home alone.
         Lizzie met her at the gateFull of wise upbraidings:“Dear, you should not stay so late,Twilight is not good for maidens;Should not loiter in the glenIn the haunts of goblin men.Do you not remember Jeanie,How she met them in the moonlight,Took their gifts both choice and many,Ate their fruits and wore their flowersPluck’d from bowersWhere summer ripens at all hours?But ever in the noonlightShe pined and pined away;Sought them by night and day,Found them no more, but dwindled and grew grey;Then fell with the first snow,While to this day no grass will growWhere she lies low:I planted daisies there a year agoThat never blow.You should not loiter so.”“Nay, hush,” said Laura:“Nay, hush, my sister:I ate and ate my fill,Yet my mouth waters still;To-morrow night I willBuy more;” and kiss’d her:“Have done with sorrow;I’ll bring you plums to-morrowFresh on their mother twigs,Cherries worth getting;You cannot think what figsMy teeth have met in,What melons icy-coldPiled on a dish of goldToo huge for me to hold,What peaches with a velvet nap,Pellucid grapes without one seed:Odorous indeed must be the meadWhereon they grow, and pure the wave they drinkWith lilies at the brink,And sugar-sweet their sap.”
         Golden head by golden head,Like two pigeons in one nestFolded in each other’s wings,They lay down in their curtain’d bed:Like two blossoms on one stem,Like two flakes of new-fall’n snow,Like two wands of ivoryTipp’d with gold for awful kings.Moon and stars gaz’d in at them,Wind sang to them lullaby,Lumbering owls forbore to fly,Not a bat flapp’d to and froRound their rest:Cheek to cheek and breast to breastLock’d together in one nest.
         Early in the morningWhen the first cock crow’d his warning,Neat like bees, as sweet and busy,Laura rose with Lizzie:Fetch’d in honey, milk’d the cows,Air’d and set to rights the house,Kneaded cakes of whitest wheat,Cakes for dainty mouths to eat,Next churn’d butter, whipp’d up cream,Fed their poultry, sat and sew’d;Talk’d as modest maidens should:Lizzie with an open heart,Laura in an absent dream,One content, one sick in part;One warbling for the mere bright day’s delight,One longing for the night.
         At length slow evening came:They went with pitchers to the reedy brook;Lizzie most placid in her look,Laura most like a leaping flame.They drew the gurgling water from its deep;Lizzie pluck’d purple and rich golden flags,Then turning homeward said: “The sunset flushesThose furthest loftiest crags;Come, Laura, not another maiden lags.No wilful squirrel wags,The beasts and birds are fast asleep.”But Laura loiter’d still among the rushesAnd said the bank was steep.
         And said the hour was early stillThe dew not fall’n, the wind not chill;Listening ever, but not catchingThe customary cry,“Come buy, come buy,”With its iterated jingleOf sugar-baited words:Not for all her watchingOnce discerning even one goblinRacing, whisking, tumbling, hobbling;Let alone the herdsThat used to tramp along the glen,In groups or single,Of brisk fruit-merchant men.
         Till Lizzie urged, “O Laura, come;I hear the fruit-call but I dare not look:You should not loiter longer at this brook:Come with me home.The stars rise, the moon bends her arc,Each glowworm winks her spark,Let us get home before the night grows dark:For clouds may gatherThough this is summer weather,Put out the lights and drench us through;Then if we lost our way what should we do?”
         Laura turn’d cold as stoneTo find her sister heard that cry alone,That goblin cry,“Come buy our fruits, come buy.”Must she then buy no more such dainty fruit?Must she no more such succous pasture find,Gone deaf and blind?Her tree of life droop’d from the root:She said not one word in her heart’s sore ache;But peering thro’ the dimness, nought discerning,Trudg’d home, her pitcher dripping all the way;So crept to bed, and laySilent till Lizzie slept;Then sat up in a passionate yearning,And gnash’d her teeth for baulk’d desire, and weptAs if her heart would break.
         Day after day, night after night,Laura kept watch in vainIn sullen silence of exceeding pain.She never caught again the goblin cry:“Come buy, come buy;”—She never spied the goblin menHawking their fruits along the glen:But when the noon wax’d brightHer hair grew thin and grey;She dwindled, as the fair full moon doth turnTo swift decay and burnHer fire away.
         One day remembering her kernel-stoneShe set it by a wall that faced the south;Dew’d it with tears, hoped for a root,Watch’d for a waxing shoot,But there came none;It never saw the sun,It never felt the trickling moisture run:While with sunk eyes and faded mouthShe dream’d of melons, as a traveller seesFalse waves in desert drouthWith shade of leaf-crown’d trees,And burns the thirstier in the sandful breeze.
         She no more swept the house,Tended the fowls or cows,Fetch’d honey, kneaded cakes of wheat,Brought water from the brook:But sat down listless in the chimney-nookAnd would not eat.
         Tender Lizzie could not bearTo watch her sister’s cankerous careYet not to share.She night and morningCaught the goblins’ cry:“Come buy our orchard fruits,Come buy, come buy;”—Beside the brook, along the glen,She heard the tramp of goblin men,The yoke and stirPoor Laura could not hear;Long’d to buy fruit to comfort her,But fear’d to pay too dear.She thought of Jeanie in her grave,Who should have been a bride;But who for joys brides hope to haveFell sick and diedIn her gay prime,In earliest winter timeWith the first glazing rime,With the first snow-fall of crisp winter time.
         Till Laura dwindlingSeem’d knocking at Death’s door:Then Lizzie weigh’d no moreBetter and worse;But put a silver penny in her purse,Kiss’d Laura, cross’d the heath with clumps of furzeAt twilight, halted by the brook:And for the first time in her lifeBegan to listen and look.
         Laugh’d every goblinWhen they spied her peeping:Came towards her hobbling,Flying, running, leaping,Puffing and blowing,Chuckling, clapping, crowing,Clucking and gobbling,Mopping and mowing,Full of airs and graces,Pulling wry faces,Demure grimaces,Cat-like and rat-like,Ratel- and wombat-like,Snail-paced in a hurry,Parrot-voiced and whistler,Helter skelter, hurry skurry,Chattering like magpies,Fluttering like pigeons,Gliding like fishes,—Hugg’d her and kiss’d her:Squeez’d and caress’d her:Stretch’d up their dishes,Panniers, and plates:“Look at our applesRusset and dun,Bob at our cherries,Bite at our peaches,Citrons and dates,Grapes for the asking,Pears red with baskingOut in the sun,Plums on their twigs;Pluck them and suck them,Pomegranates, figs.”—
         “Good folk,” said Lizzie,Mindful of Jeanie:“Give me much and many: —Held out her apron,Toss’d them her penny.“Nay, take a seat with us,Honour and eat with us,”They answer’d grinning:“Our feast is but beginning.Night yet is early,Warm and dew-pearly,Wakeful and starry:Such fruits as theseNo man can carry:Half their bloom would fly,Half their dew would dry,Half their flavour would pass by.Sit down and feast with us,Be welcome guest with us,Cheer you and rest with us.”—“Thank you,” said Lizzie: “But one waitsAt home alone for me:So without further parleying,If you will not sell me anyOf your fruits though much and many,Give me back my silver pennyI toss’d you for a fee.”—They began to scratch their pates,No longer wagging, purring,But visibly demurring,Grunting and snarling.One call’d her proud,Cross-grain’d, uncivil;Their tones wax’d loud,Their looks were evil.Lashing their tailsThey trod and hustled her,Elbow’d and jostled her,Claw’d with their nails,Barking, mewing, hissing, mocking,Tore her gown and soil’d her stocking,Twitch’d her hair out by the roots,Stamp’d upon her tender feet,Held her hands and squeez’d their fruitsAgainst her mouth to make her eat.
         White and golden Lizzie stood,Like a lily in a flood,—Like a rock of blue-vein’d stoneLash’d by tides obstreperously,—Like a beacon left aloneIn a hoary roaring sea,Sending up a golden fire,—Like a fruit-crown’d orange-treeWhite with blossoms honey-sweetSore beset by wasp and bee,—Like a royal virgin townTopp’d with gilded dome and spireClose beleaguer’d by a fleetMad to tug her standard down.
         One may lead a horse to water,Twenty cannot make him drink.Though the goblins cuff’d and caught her,Coax’d and fought her,Bullied and besought her,Scratch’d her, pinch’d her black as ink,Kick’d and knock’d her,Maul’d and mock’d her,Lizzie utter’d not a word;Would not open lip from lipLest they should cram a mouthful in:But laugh’d in heart to feel the dripOf juice that syrupp’d all her face,And lodg’d in dimples of her chin,And streak’d her neck which quaked like curd.At last the evil people,Worn out by her resistance,Flung back her penny, kick’d their fruitAlong whichever road they took,Not leaving root or stone or shoot;Some writh’d into the ground,Some div’d into the brookWith ring and ripple,Some scudded on the gale without a sound,Some vanish’d in the distance.
         In a smart, ache, tingle,Lizzie went her way;Knew not was it night or day;Sprang up the bank, tore thro’ the furze,Threaded copse and dingle,And heard her penny jingleBouncing in her purse,—Its bounce was music to her ear.She ran and ranAs if she fear’d some goblin manDogg’d her with gibe or curseOr something worse:But not one goblin scurried after,Nor was she prick’d by fear;The kind heart made her windy-pacedThat urged her home quite out of breath with hasteAnd inward laughter.
         She cried, “Laura,” up the garden,“Did you miss me?Come and kiss me.Never mind my bruises,Hug me, kiss me, suck my juicesSqueez’d from goblin fruits for you,Goblin pulp and goblin dew.Eat me, drink me, love me;Laura, make much of me;For your sake I have braved the glenAnd had to do with goblin merchant men.”
         Laura started from her chair,Flung her arms up in the air,Clutch’d her hair:“Lizzie, Lizzie, have you tastedFor my sake the fruit forbidden?Must your light like mine be hidden,Your young life like mine be wasted,Undone in mine undoing,And ruin’d in my ruin,Thirsty, canker’d, goblin-ridden?”—She clung about her sister,Kiss’d and kiss’d and kiss’d her:Tears once againRefresh’d her shrunken eyes,Dropping like rainAfter long sultry drouth;Shaking with aguish fear, and pain,She kiss’d and kiss’d her with a hungry mouth.
         Her lips began to scorch,That juice was wormwood to her tongue,She loath’d the feast:Writhing as one possess’d she leap’d and sung,Rent all her robe, and wrungHer hands in lamentable haste,And beat her breast.Her locks stream’d like the torchBorne by a racer at full speed,Or like the mane of horses in their flight,Or like an eagle when she stems the lightStraight toward the sun,Or like a caged thing freed,Or like a flying flag when armies run.
         Swift fire spread through her veins, knock’d at her heart,Met the fire smouldering thereAnd overbore its lesser flame;She gorged on bitterness without a name:Ah! fool, to choose such partOf soul-consuming care!Sense fail’d in the mortal strife:Like the watch-tower of a townWhich an earthquake shatters down,Like a lightning-stricken mast,Like a wind-uprooted treeSpun about,Like a foam-topp’d waterspoutCast down headlong in the sea,She fell at last;Pleasure past and anguish past,Is it death or is it life?
         Life out of death.That night long Lizzie watch’d by her,Counted her pulse’s flagging stir,Felt for her breath,Held water to her lips, and cool’d her faceWith tears and fanning leaves:But when the first birds chirp’d about their eaves,And early reapers plodded to the placeOf golden sheaves,And dew-wet grassBow’d in the morning winds so brisk to pass,And new buds with new dayOpen’d of cup-like lilies on the stream,Laura awoke as from a dream,Laugh’d in the innocent old way,Hugg’d Lizzie but not twice or thrice;Her gleaming locks show’d not one thread of grey,Her breath was sweet as MayAnd light danced in her eyes.
         Days, weeks, months, yearsAfterwards, when both were wivesWith children of their own;Their mother-hearts beset with fears,Their lives bound up in tender lives;Laura would call the little onesAnd tell them of her early prime,Those pleasant days long goneOf not-returning time:Would talk about the haunted glen,The wicked, quaint fruit-merchant men,Their fruits like honey to the throatBut poison in the blood;(Men sell not such in any town):Would tell them how her sister stoodIn deadly peril to do her good,And win the fiery antidote:Then joining hands to little handsWould bid them cling together,“For there is no friend like a sisterIn calm or stormy weather;To cheer one on the tedious way,To fetch one if one goes astray,To lift one if one totters down,To strengthen whilst one stands.”
~~~
The mind goes caw, caw, caw, caw,   
dark and fast. The orphan heart   
cries out, “Save me. Purchase me   
as the sun makes the fruit ripe.
I am one with them and cannot feed   
on winter dawns.” The black birds   
are wrangling in the fields
and have no kindness, all sinew
and stick bones. Both male and female.   
Their eyes are careless of cold and rain,   
of both day and night. They love nothing   
and are murderous with each other.   
All things of the world are bowing   
or being taken away. Only a few calves   
will be chosen, the rest sold for meat.   
The sound of the wind grows bigger   
than the tree it’s in, lessens only   
to increase. Haw, haw the crows call,   
awake or asleep, in white, in black.
~~~
—
 
One hundred breaths split the air
as I lean
on the only pine tree I find.
It’s early or late, it’s breezy or hot.
The fields are dry. Summer is near.
The horses are everywhere,
strangely galloping a dream,
but I can’t remember
how to call them,
so I stand back, watch them pass.
 
 
—
 
The first time I rode a horse
my body found the music of fire,
crackling the wind. An unbearable pleasure
that also left me with a burn on the side of my leg.A sign, the horsekeeper told me, of longing.A need to return—to belong.
After all, departure is like
pushing the weight of our heart
against the village
whose name has kept us awake.
 
 
—
 
Rafael came from somewhere in Eurasia.
I passed my hands through his mane—
saw a history of conquests and battles,
a field of hay, a mount of truth,
heard a silent ring,
his eyes asking me to go with him,
to confess something sacred,
to name something lustful.
Nothing of where he came from,
or who I was, disturbed us.
 
 
—
 
I knew he was different by the way he ran—
without pause,
without grace,
without distraction,
without ease.
He was told how to move in the world
and resented it.
He knew he would never own anything.
 
 
—
 
He came toward me.
It was a quiet afternoon.
I stood unmoving.
And we listened to the untitled music
circling the earth like an anthem
free of its nation.
 
 
—
 
He was unfamiliar to me,
approaching as if he possessed the land.
Every morning he stopped five feet
from the river.
~~~
It was dusk, the light hesitating
and a murmer in the wind, when the deer, exhausted,
turned to look at me, an arrow in its side.
Though I pity dreamers, taking a thread
and weaving it upon the loom of Self—the secret,
gaudy, wonderful new cloth—, I will tell the end of the story.
His shoulder was torn, the joint held by one sinew,
which I severed with the blade of the arrow,
so when he ran there were no impediments.
The black dogs that followed were swifter,
their barking ancient, despicable.
As he fell, his chest turned to breastplate,
his one powerful arm covered with pagan signs.
Nearly stupid in my waiting for what would happen next,
each breath propelling me and him toward dust,
I woke, the sheets soaked, heart fluttering—:
When death comes into the sleeping room as through a tiny hole,
like a rent in the Covenant, it hurts.
~~~
My damn cat brings me a dead songbird,
wren or finch, I don’t know what it is—
I mistook at first its folded grey
for a strangely shaped piece of lint
in the cubicle beneath my desk—nor which
cat for I have two: Cricket with her dense
body and stubby legs who jumps down
from every shelf so reverberatingly, I call
her the Black Bomb, or Ingrid, the quiet
Russian Blue, whom I call Gritty because
her coat is stealthy with dust. They’re always
leaving me offerings—the mouse upon
the threshold when I return from some
trip, the redheaded grosbeak on the sill—
but death is different in the front yard
or even on the threshold, than Death
on a particular morning, crawling into the house,
carrying a warm form frozen in its warm mouth,
tongue and tooth salivating a fluff of warble and whistle
into a smoothly folded, iced, silenced thing, Death
triumphant, affectionate! as if anyone would be happy
feeding upon dead songs torn from the air.
 
~~~
A giraffe presented its head to me, tilting it   sideways, reaching out its long gray tongue.   I gave it my wheat cracker while small drops   of rain pounded us both.  Lightning cracked open   the sky.  Zebras zipped across the field.   It was springtime in Michigan.  I watched   the giraffe shuffle itself backwards, toward   the herd, its bone- and rust-colored fur beading   with water.  The entire mix of animals stood   away from the trees.  A lone emu shook   its round body hard and squawked.  It ran   along the fence line, jerking open its wings.   Perhaps it was trying to shake away the burden   of water or indulging an urge to fly.  I can’t know.   I have no idea what about their lives these animals   love or abhor.  They are captured or born here for us,   and we come.  It’s true.  This is my favorite field.
~~~
Poor devil, dog six years on a tether
clipped to a cubby box.
The sun dropped into a slot
on one side & after a dark spell
popped up on the other.
Birds of a weather chattered along
wires overhead & the yards around
shrilled emergencies.
Who knew? Once upon afternoon
a dust demon spins itself up
in the master’s tumbleweed to his match scratch: puff:
mega blaze & four hours’
ruckus until doused out. I’ll bask
three days in wonders. I’ll slobber & yawn. I’ll gnaw
& grunt in my groin to my heart’s content.
They say death changes a body’s
mind about things.
Master shuts up & just rots.
~~~
The Whale that wanders round the Pole   
   Is not a table fish.
You cannot bake or boil him whole,   
   Nor serve him in a dish;
But you may cut his blubber up
   And melt it down for oil,
And so replace the colza bean
   (A product of the soil).
These facts should all be noted down   
   And ruminated on,
By every boy in Oxford town
   Who wants to be a Don.
~~~
The first four leaders had broken knees
The four old dams had broken knees
The flock would start to run, then freeze
The first four leaders had broken knees
‘Why is the flock so docile?’ asked the hawk.
‘Yes, why is the flock so docile,’ laughed the dog,
‘The shepherd’s mallet is in his hand,
The shepherd’s hand is on the land,
The flock will start to run, then freeze—
The four old dams have broken knees,’
The dog explained.
The hawk exclaimed:
‘The shepherd leads an easy life!’
‘I know, I know,’ cried the shepherd’s wife,
‘He dresses me out in a narrow skirt
and leaves me home to clean his dirt.
Whenever I try to run, I freeze—All the old dams have broken knees.’
‘Well, I’m so glad he doesn’t dare
to bring his breaking power to bear
on me,’ said the hawk, flying into the sun;
while the dog warned, in his dog run:
‘Hawk—the shepherd has bought a gun!’
‘Why is the hawk so docile?’ asked the flock,
‘He fell to the ground in a feathery breeze;
He lies in a dumb lump under the trees,
We believe we’d rather have broken knees
Than lose our blood and suddenly freeze
Like him.’
But the oldest dam gave her leg a lick,
And said, ‘Some die slow and some die quick,
A few run away and the rest crawl,
But the shepherd never dies at all—
Damn his soul.
I’d will my wool to the shepherd’s wife
If she could change the shepherd’s life,
But I myself would bring him low
If only, only I knew how.’
~~~
You shout my name
from beyond my dreams,
beyond the picture window
of this Rosarito beach house.
Rushing from bed to shore
I glimpse their backs—
volcanoes rising out of the sea.
Your back, a blue-black silhouette,
feet wet with the wash of morning waves.
Fountains spring from mammal minds,
my hands lifting a splash of sand.
I'm on my knees,
toes finding a cool prayer
beneath them, fingers pressing
sea foam to my temples,
while you open arms wide as a generation,
raise them to a compass point,
dive.
If you could reach them,
you would ride their fins
under the horizon,
then surf the crash of waves
left in their wake.
And if I could grasp
my own fear,
I'd drown it,
leave it breathless and blue
as this ocean,
as the brilliant backs
of whales
surfacing
for air.
~~~
When his owner died in 2000 and a new family
moved into their Moscow apartment,
he went to live with mongrels in the park.
In summer there was plenty of food, kids
often left behind sandwiches, hotdogs and other stuff.
He didn’t have a big appetite,
still missing his old guy.
He too was old, the ladies no longer excited him,
and he didn’t burn calories chasing them around.
Then winter came and the little folk abandoned the park.
The idea of eating from the trash occurred to him
but the minute he started rummaging in the
overturned garbage container, a voice
in his head said: “No, Rex!”
The remnants of a good upbringing lower
our natural survival skills.
I met him again in the early spring of 2001.
He looked terrific. Turning gray became him.
His dark shepherd eyes were perfectly bright,
like those of a puppy.
I asked him how he sustained himself
in this new free-market situation
when even the human species suffered from malnutrition.
In response he told me his story;
how at first he thought that life without his man
wasn’t worth it, how those
who petted him when he was a pet
then turned away from him, and how one night
he had a revelation.
His man came to him in his sleep,
tapped him on his skinny neck and said:
“Let’s go shopping!” So the next morning he took the subway
and went to the street market
where they used to go together every Sunday and where
vendors recognized him and fed him
to his heart’s content.
“Perhaps you should move closer to that area?”
I ventured.—“No, I’ll stay here,” he sighed,
“oldies shouldn’t change their topography. That’s
what my man said.”
Indeed, he sounded like one himself.
 
~~~
Up, up, slender
         As an eel’s
         Child, weaving
Through water, our lonely
Pipefish seeks out his dinner,
         Scanty at best; he blinks
         Cut-diamond eyes—snap—he
         Grabs morsels so small
Only a lens pinpoints them,
But he ranges all over
         That plastic preserve—dorsal
         Fin tremulous—snap—and
         Another çedilla
Of brine shrimp’s gone ...
We talk on of poetry, of love,
         Of grammar; he looks
         At a living comma—         Snap—sizzling about
In his two-gallon Caribbean
And grazes on umlauts for breakfast.
         His pug nosed, yellow
         Mate, aproned in gloom,
         Fed rarely, slumped,
Went deadwhite, as we argued on;
That rudder fin, round as a
         Pizza cutter, at the
         End of his two inch
         Fluent stick self, lets his eyes
Pilot his mouth—snap ...
Does his kind remember? Can our kind forget?
~~~
My mare, when she was in heat,
would travel the fenceline for hours,
wearing the impatience
in her feet into the ground.
Not a stallion for miles, I’d assure her,
give it up.
She’d widen her nostrils,
sieve the wind for news, be moving again,
her underbelly darkening with sweat,
then stop at the gate a moment, wait
to see what I might do.
Oh, I knew
how it was for her, easily
recognized myself in that wide lust:
came to stand in the pasture
just to see it played.
Offered a hand, a bucket of grain—
a minute’s distraction from passion
the most I gave.
Then she’d return to what burned her:
the fence, the fence,
so hoping I might see, might let her free.
I’d envy her then,
to be so restlessly sure
of heat, and need, and what it takes
to feed the wanting that we are—
only a gap to open
the width of a mare,
the rest would take care of itself.
Surely, surely I knew that,
who had the power of bucket
and bridle—
she would beseech me, sidle up,
be gone, as life is short.
But desire, desire is long.
~~~
Think of the woman who first touched fire
to a hollow stone filled with seal oil,
how she fiddled with fuel and flame
until blue shadows before and after her
filled her house, crowded
the underground, then
fled like sky-captains
chasing the aurora’s whale tale
green beyond the earth’s curve.
Her tenth summer, the elders let her
raise her issum, seal pup orphaned
when hunters brought in her mother,
their grins of plenty
broad, red. The women
slit the hard belly.
Plopped among the ruby innards
steaming on rough-cut planks
blinked a new sea-child
whose first sound
came out a question
in the old language, a question
that in one throaty bark
asked who, meaning What family
is this? What comfort
do you provide for guests?
Do you let strangers remain
strangers? The women rinsed the slick pup
in cool water, crafted a pouch
for her to suck. Then the young girl
whose hands held light
even when the room did not
brought this new being
beside her bed, let it scatter
babiche and split birch
gathered for snowshoes, let it
nose the caribou neck hairs
bearding her dance fans. They
held up the fans to their foreheads,
playing white hair, playing old.
In the time when women do not sew
the seal danced at her first potlatch.
And when the lamps burned down,
no one could see
any difference between waves
in rock, waves in sea.
The pup lifted her nose, licked
salt from seven stars, and slipped
light back among silvers and chum
light among the ghostly belugas
swimming far north to offer themselves.
~~~
Customs and chemistry made a name for themselves and it was Spot. He's gone to some utopos now, the dirty dog, doctor of  crotches, digger of holes. Your airy clarities be damned,  he loved our must and our mistakes — why hit him, then, who did us good? He's dead, he ought to be at home. He's damned  put out, and so am I.  *       *       * When blue is carried out, the law is red. When noon is said and done, it's dusk again. The greed for table makes the greed for bed.  So cave canem, even stars have litters — little  lookers, cacklers, killers . . . Morning raises up  the hackled men. (What's  milk, among our ilk, but  opportunity for spillers?)  *       *       * He saved our sorry  highfalutin souls — the heavens haven't saved a fly. Orion's  canniness who can condone? — that starring story, strapping blade! —  and Sirius is  just a Fido joke — no laughter shakes the firmament. But O the family dog, the Buddha-dog — son of a bitch! he had a funny bone —
~~~
Inside the night, this hospital, asylum,
this party for those undone by desire, forever
unslaked, inside a house inside the night,
I'm inside
this house with eight beams and moonlight
pulling on the past through skylights, this house
of white noise, wind and dry heat, lonely
house on a ridge line, house of ordinary
shame,
my sister's house with corrals and outbuildings
around it, and beyond that, the dog
patrolling, and beyond that, skirts and folds
of the mountain rising in rumpled geologic
scrolls into the range.
At the center
beneath the moon's silence that nothing
ever changes, muffled in blankets with fear
beside me on my little bench of sleep,
I can hear their voices,
could be three or twenty-three,
unhinged saints gabbling to their shadows,
or panty-sniffers, drug-trippers in all flavors
past vanilla, could be Birnam wood
on the move, the shriek of its roots thirsty
and air-brushed, or a pack of lunatics
crooning norteño songs.
What is certain is advent.
They're coming down,
                             coming towards
the heart beneath the feathers,
coming for
what can't be protected,
on a beam of dread,
riding that ray.
I'm listening, my eyes snapped-open
inside darkness, other people in other rooms
who know how to sleep through a night
like this night, thrown against the roundness
of the world which is desire.
The old bitch guards this night on the ranch,
half shepherd, half other, this is her watch,
she gallops the perimeter, anxious to sound like
more than one dog, though she's going arthritic
and her paws strike the hard ground.
Now they quiet, penitents, lunatics,
marauders and ragpickers, quiet.
Only one left behind and the moon
                           is his hieroglyph,
one creature padding
                down the mountain,
coming closer.
Coyote knows a good joke,
he only wants to let her in on it.
He can't stop laughing, can't stop
crying, can't stop licking the crevices
clean, licking safety and duty
until they're empty.
I hear the dog listening, ears lifted.
Coyote's tongue slides into night
air, pressing narcotic vowels throughwonder, through longing
and longing and wonder awaken. She's close
to that edge, that border in the night
where one thing becomes another and even
an old dog who's worked a ranch eleven years
feels the urge to let loose, blow this little
settlement, go wild.
Clouds loose and blue in the arms
of the moon, slant light on this mountain raking
us, the dog and I, we feel the pull. Imagine
a woman trying to come between
coyote and the female he's after
when she knows
what is dark and offers itself and vanishes
has come for her at last? The body wants
what it can't have, to follow the path
of thirst through the rent in the wire
beyond the corral.
The dog doesn't move, but who knows
better than she the small outpost
death has set up in her, maybe she's all
desire now to slip under the moon
and chase down that lure.
Coyote wheedles and croons another minute
or two, then lopes off, calling over his shoulder
in a language even I can understand,
the right names for thingsnot kept in heaven.
 
~~~
I was ill, lying on my bed of old papers,
when you came with white rabbits in your arms;
and the doves scattered upwards, flying to mothers,
and the snails sighed under their baggage of stone . . .
Now your tongue grows like celery between us:
Because of our love-cries, cabbage darkens in its nest;
the cauliflower thinks of her pale, plump children
and turns greenish-white in a light like the ocean’s.
I was sick, fainting in the smell of teabags,
when you came with tomatoes, a good poetry.
I am being wooed. I am being conquered
by a cliff of limestone that leaves chalk on my breasts.
~~~
I love to watch them sheathe themselves mid-air,
shut wings and ride the light’s poor spine
to earth, to touch down in gutters, in the rainbowed
urine of suicides, just outside Bellevue’s walls.
From in there the ransacked cadavers are carried
up the East River to Potter’s Field
as if they were an inheritance,
gleaned of saveable parts,
their diseases jarred and labeled, or incinerated,
the ashes of metastisized vision
professing the virus that lives beyond the flesh
in air ...
               
               The first time I saw the inside of anything
alive, a downed bird opened cleanly
under my heel. I knelt
to watch the spectral innards shine and quicken,
the heart-whir magnify.
And though I can’t say now what kind of bird it was,
nor the season, spring or autumn, what
dangerous transition,
I have identified so many times that sudden
earnest spasm of the throat in children,
or in the jaundiced faces of the dying,
the lower eye-lids straining upward.
Fear needs its metaphors.
I’ve read small helplessnesses make us maternal.
Even the sparrows feel it,
nesting this evening in traffic lights.
They must have remembered, long enough to mate,
woods they’ve never seen,
but woods inbred up the long light of instinct,
the streaked siennas of a forest floor
born now into the city,
the oak umbers, and the white tuft
of tail feathers like a milkweed meadow
in which their song, as Burroughs heard it,
could be distinguished:come-come-where-where-all-together-
down-the-hill ...
~~~
Be kind and tender to the Frog,
   And do not call him names,
As ‘Slimy skin,’ or ‘Polly-wog,’
   Or likewise ‘Ugly James,’
Or ‘Gape-a-grin,’ or ‘Toad-gone-wrong,’   
   Or ‘Billy Bandy-knees’:
The Frog is justly sensitive
   To epithets like these.
No animal will more repay
   A treatment kind and fair;
At least so lonely people say
Who keep a frog (and, by the way,   
They are extremely rare).
~~~
sound opens sound
shank of globe             strings floating out
                something like images are here
                opening up avenues to view a dome
       a distant clang reaches the edifice.
                              
                understanding what it means
                to understand music
~~~
Blizzard to lilac. Dandelion
to leaf. Endless
variation of seasons I note
in passing, smells
I cannot smell: rotting
gardens, feces, musk of cat.
These two
run in front of me, golden
shoulder to patchwork, heads
lifted or lowered into
scent, tongues lolling. Ears
damp with their own
spittle and each other's
tell me, tethered a pace behind,
their journey's epic: tipping
forward to the familiar or
stranger's distant yap; angling
to my breathing, whispered
praise, my slightest
suggestion.
Ignored.
The shepherd
throws herself into
any whirring wheel, to herd
the neighbor's tractor mower or
the UPS truck's packets
home; pulling her back,
the golden's oblivious
ballast, instinct heading
always for the gutter's
deepest puddle, her own way
within the forked leash's
one-foot range. As we pass,
the clans set up
their barking, as if we
were news, gathering center
of a congenial warning
din—mine answer with
disturbances of pace, an extra pull
or lollop, grins thrown
slant-eyed over shoulders
until one hears a call
she can't ignore, surrenders
to baying's ferocious
joy moving through
muscle and bone. Moving
storm, storm's eye: happy
universes whirl in their skins
as I do in mine. Unknowable,
their fate. Mediums between
foreign principalities, they're tied
to me, to each other, by my will,
by love; to that other realm
by song, and tooth, and blood.
~~~
april is a dog's dream
the soft grass is growing
the sweet breeze is blowing
the air all full of singing feels just right
so no excuses now
we're going to the park
to chase and charge and chew
and I will make you see
what spring is all about
 
 
~~~
It’s like being lost in the forest, hungry, with a plump live chicken in your cradling arms: you want to savage the bird, but you also want the eggs. You go weak on your legs. What’s worse, what you need most is the companionship, but you’re too hungry to know that. That is something you only know after you’ve been lost a lot and always, eventually, alit upon your bird; consumed her before you’d realized what a friend she’d been, letting you sleep-in late on the forest floor though she herself awoke at the moment of dawn and thought of long-lost rooster voices quaking the golden straw. She looks over at you, sleeping, and what can I tell you, she loves you, but like a friend. Eventually, when lost in a forest with a friendly chicken you make a point of emerging from the woods together, triumphant; her, fat with bugs, you, lean with berries. Still, while you yet wander, you can not resist telling her your joke: Guy sees a pig with three legs, asks the farmer, What gives? Farmer says, That pig woke my family from a fire, got us all out. Says the guy, And lost the leg thereby? Nope, says the farmer, Still had all four when he took  a bullet for me when I had  my little struggle with the law. Guy nods, So that’s where  he lost his paw? Farmer shakes it off, says, Nah, we fixed him up. A pause, guy says, So how’d he lose  the leg? Farmer says, Well, hell, a pig like that  you don’t eat all at once. Chicken squints. Doesn’t think it’s funny.
~~~
The Poet:          Fugitive lung, prodigal intestine—            where’s the pink crimp in my side            where they took you out? The Octopus:          It must be a dull world, indeed,            where everything appears            to be a version or extrapolation            of you.            The birds are you.            The springtime is you.            Snails, hurricanes, saddles, elevators—            everything becomes            you.            I, with a shift            of my skin, divest my self            to become the rock            that shadows it.            Think of when            your reading eyes momentarily drift,            and in that instant            you see the maddening swarm of alien ciphers submerged within the text            gone before you can focus.            That’s me.                      Or your dozing revelation            on the subway that you are            slowly being            digested. Me again.            I am the fever dream            in which you see your loved ones            as executioners. I am also their axe.            Friend, while you’re exhausting            the end of a day            with your sad approximations,            I’m a mile deep            in the earth, vamping            my most flawless impression            of the abyss            to the wild applause of eels.
~~~
As a friend to the children commend me the Yak.   
   You will find it exactly the thing:
It will carry and fetch, you can ride on its back,   
   Or lead it about with a string.
The Tartar who dwells on the plains of Thibet   
   (A desolate region of snow)
Has for centuries made it a nursery pet,   
   And surely the Tartar should know!
Then tell your papa where the Yak can be got,   
   And if he is awfully rich
He will buy you the creature—or else he will not.
   (I cannot be positive which.)
~~~
As if there could be a world
Of absolute innocence
In which we forget ourselves
The owners throw sticks
And half-bald tennis balls
Toward the surf
And the happy dogs leap after them
As if catapulted—
Black dogs, tan dogs,
Tubes of glorious muscle—
Pursuing pleasure
More than obedience
They race, skid to a halt in the wet sand,
Sometimes they'll plunge straight into
The foaming breakers
Like diving birds, letting the green turbulence
Toss them, until they snap and sink
Teeth into floating wood
Then bound back to their owners
Shining wet, with passionate speed
For nothing,
For absolutely nothing but joy.
~~~
Houses red as flower of bean,Flickering leaves and shadows lean!Pantalone, like a parrot,Sat and grumbled in the garret—Sat and growled and grumbled till Moon upon the window-sillLike a red geraniumScented his bald cranium.Said Brighella, meaning well:“Pack your box and—go to Hell!Heat will cure your rheumatism!” . . .Silence crowned this optimism—Not a sound and not a wail:But the fire (lush leafy vales)Watched the angry feathers fly.Pantalone ’gan to cry—Could not, would not, pack his box!Shadows (curtseying hens and cocks)Pecking in the attic gloomTried to smother his tail-plume . . .Till a cockscomb candle-flameCrowing loudly, died: Dawn came.
~~~
I plan to be the world authority on peafowl. Believe I'll be offered a chair someday at the chicken college. —Flannery O'Connor



Certainly are niceto want to give me that dog.I raise peacocks—you can't keep dogsand them on the same place.People come herehave to leave the dog in the car else the peachickens take to the treeswith nervous prostrations.I have twenty-seven. Placesounds like a jungleat night. They yelland scream at the leastatmospheric disturbanceor mechanical noise.Sitting on the back steps, I spenddays studying howthey could decoratethe lawn to advantage. They preferto sit on the tractors,the top of the chickenhouse or garbage can lid. I adjustto their taste, whichis anti-dog. Thanksbut I'll take the thought forthe dog. Appreciateyou wanting to give it.Come visit. Nothing to do herebut sit, walk,collect red bug bites,show you a peacock beforehis tail gets ratty.
~~~
Falling to sleep last night in a deep crevasse
between one rough dream and another, I seemed,
still awake, to be stranded on a stony path,
and there the familiar enigma presented itself
in the shape of a little trembling lamb.
It was lying like a pearl in the trough between
one Welsh slab and another, and it was crying.
I looked around, as anyone would, for its mother.
Nothing was there. What did I know about lambs?
Should I pick it up? Carry it . . . where?
What would I do if it were dying? The hand
of my conscience fought with the claw of my fear.
It wasn't so easy to imitate the Good Shepherd
in that faded, framed Sunday School picture
filtering now through the dream's daguerreotype.
With the wind fallen and the moon swollen to the full,
small, white doubles of the creature at my feet
flared like candles in the creases of the night
until it looked to be alive with newborn lambs.
Where could they all have come from?
A second look, and the bleating lambs were birds—
kittiwakes nesting, clustered on a cliff face,
fixing on me their dark accusing eyes.
There was a kind of imperative not to touch them,
yet to be of them, whatever they were—
now lambs, now birds, now floating points of light—
fireflies signaling how many lost New England summers?
One form, now another; one configuration, now another.
Like fossils locked deep in the folds of my brain,
outliving a time by telling its story. Like stars.