
~~~
Which reminds me of another knock-on-wood   
memory. I was cycling with a male friend,
through a small midwestern town. We came to a 4-way   
stop and stopped, chatting. As we started again,   
a rusty old pick-up truck, ignoring the stop sign,   
hurricaned past scant inches from our front wheels.   
My partner called, “Hey, that was a 4-way stop!”   
The truck driver, stringy blond hair a long fringe
under his brand-name beer cap, looked back and yelled,
                “You fucking niggers!”
And sped off.
My friend and I looked at each other and shook our heads.   
We remounted our bikes and headed out of town.   
We were pedaling through a clear blue afternoon   
between two fields of almost-ripened wheat   
bordered by cornflowers and Queen Anne’s lace   
when we heard an unmuffled motor, a honk-honking.   
We stopped, closed ranks, made fists.
It was the same truck. It pulled over.
A tall, very much in shape young white guy slid out:   
greasy jeans, homemade finger tattoos, probably   
a Marine Corps boot-camp footlockerful   
of martial arts techniques.
“What did you say back there!” he shouted.   
My friend said, “I said it was a 4-way stop.   
You went through it.”
“And what did I say?” the white guy asked.   
“You said: ‘You fucking niggers.’”
The afternoon froze.
“Well,” said the white guy,
shoving his hands into his pockets
and pushing dirt around with the pointed toe of his boot,   
“I just want to say I’m sorry.”
He climbed back into his truck
and drove away.
~~~
be born: black
as ants on a chicken bone black
 
as Nina Simone and Mahalia’s moan black
as rock pile smile and resilience black
 
as resistance and rhythm and Sonny’s blues black
as no shoes and dirt floors black
 
as whore and Hottentot foxtrot Lindy Hop
and Watusi pussy and pyramids black
 
as darkness under your eyelids black
between your legs black
 
as dregs of rum sugarcane summer
plums holyghost hum black
 
as bruised throat fieldholla wading in the shallow black
as ocean river stream creek running black
 
transparent translucent transatlantic slanted
shanties planted in red clay black
 
as funky chickens and chitlins and kinfolk sold away black
as auction block and slop and hip-hop and rock and roll
 
and chop shop and cop cars and parole and overseer
patrols and one drop rules and pools of blood black
 
as beige and good hair and sounding white and light-skindeded
and my grandmamma is Cherokee, Iroquois, Choctaw black
 
as pit bulls and lockjaw and rage and hoodies black
eyes and black-eyed peas peasy heads and loose tracks black
 
as trees and noose and hounds let loose in the night black
as fist and fight Sojourner and Nat Turner and righteousness black
 
as fuck and not giving a fuck mud-stuck and quicksand
quick hand hustle thigh muscle and hurdle black
 
as cotton and tobacco and indigo black
as wind and bad weather and feather
 
and tar and snap beans in mason jars black
as nigga please and hallelujah black
 
asses and black strap molasses and turn your black
back on audiences black
 
as banjo and djembe and porch and stoop and spooks
sitting by the door black
 
as roaches in front of company and lawn jockeys
and latchkey kids and high bids and spades and shittalk black
 
as cakewalk and second line and black
magic and tap dance, lapdance and alla that ass black
 
as jazz and juke and juju and spirit
disguised as harmonica spit black
 
as cast-iron skillets and grits and watermelon seeds
flitting from lips black
 
as tambourines hitting cornbread hips black
batons splitting lips and Martin Luther King, Jr.
 
boulevards and downtown beatdowns black
sit-ins and come-ups and oops upside yo’ heads
 
and we shall overcomes and get down on it black
get into it black let’s get it on and get it
 
while the getting is good black
as white hoods and backwood revivals black
 
as survival and Trayvon and Tyrone and Josephus
and amen and Moses and Jesus and getting over
 
black—
 
~~~
A man celebrates erstwhile conquests,
his book locked in a silo, still in print.
 
I scribble, make Sharpie lines, deface
its text like it defaces me. Outside, grain
 
fields whisper. Marble lions are silent
yet silver-tongued, with excellent teeth.
 
In this life I have worshipped so many lies.
Then I workshop them, make them better.
 
An East India Company, an opium trade,
a war, a treaty, a concession, an occupation,
 
a man parting the veil covering a woman’s
face, his nails prying her lips open. I love
 
the fragility of a porcelain bowl. How easy
it is, to shatter chinoiserie, like the Han
 
dynasty urn Ai Weiwei dropped in 1995.
If only recovering the silenced history
 
is as simple as smashing its container: book,
bowl, celadon spoon. Such objects cross
 
borders the way our bodies never could.
Instead, we’re left with history, its blonde
 
dust. That bowl is unbreakable. All its ghosts
still shudder through us like small breaths.
 
The tome of hegemony lives on, circulates
in our libraries, in our bloodstreams. One day,
 
a girl like me may come across it on a shelf,
pick it up, read about all the ways her body
 
is a thing. And I won’t be there to protect
her, to cross the text out and say: go ahead—rewrite this.
 
~~~
Stripped in a flamedance, the bluff backing our houses
quivered in wet-black skin. A shawl of haze tugged tight
around the starkness. We could have choked on August.
Smoke thick in our throats, nearly naked as the earth,
we played bare feet over the heat caught in asphalt.
Could we, green girls, have prepared for this? Yesterday,
we played in sand-carpeted caves. The store we built
sold broken bits of ice plant, empty snail shells, leaves.
Our school’s walls were open sky. We reeled in wonder
from the hills, oblivious to the beckoning
crescendo and to our parent’s hushed communion.
When our bluff swayed into the undulation, we ran
into the still streets of our suburb, feet burning
against a fury that we did not know was change.
~~~
hey music and
me
only white,
hair a flutter of
fall leaves
circling my perfect
line of a nose,
no lips,
no behind, hey
white me
and i’m wearing
white history
but there’s no future
in those clothes
so i take them off and
wake up
dancing.
~~~
Your voice crawls across the dashboard of Grandma’s Dodge Dynasty on the way home from Lilydale First Baptist. You sing a cocktail of static and bass. Sound like you dressed to the nines: cowboy hat, fur coat & alligator boots. Sound like you lotion every tooth. You a walking discography, South Side griot, keeper of crackle & dust in the grooves. You fell in love with a handmade box of wires at 16 and been behind the booth ever since. From wbez to V103, you be the Coolest Gent, King of the Dusties. Your voice wafts down from the ceiling at the Hair Lab. You supply the beat for Kym to tap her comb to. Her brown fingers paint my scalp with white grease to the tunes of Al & Barry & Luther. Your voice: an inside-out yawn, the sizzle of hot iron on fresh perm, the song inside the blackest seashell washed up on a sidewalk in Bronzeville. You soundtrack the church picnic, trunk party, Cynthia’s 50th birthday bash, the car ride to school, choir, Checkers. Your voice stretch across our eardrums like Daddy asleep on the couch. Sound like Grandma’s sweet potato pie, sound like the cigarettes she hide in her purse for rough days. You showed us what our mommas’ mommas must’ve moved to. When the West Side rioted the day MLK died, you were audio salve to the burning city, people. Your voice a soft sermon soothing the masses, speaking coolly to flames, spinning black records across the airwaves, spreading the gospel of soul in a time of fire. Joycetta says she bruised her thumbs snappin’ to Marvin’s “Got to Give It Up” and I believe her.
~~~
for Jerry Ward



I am the only one here. 
I stand in my one place
and I can see a good piece
down the road. I am yonder,
further than the chunk of your stone.
Right now, directly,
I am persimmon falling free
and the prisoner opening up
in me.
Don’t come through my door and
want to run my house. I am
the angel who sweep air in and out my own
dancing body. I got good eyes. I can see.
A good piece down the road. Clear to
God murmuring in me. My head is the burning
bush. What I hold in my hand is the promised
land. I set my people free in me.
And we walk without wandering like people named
after mere plants,
because we are tree
and high-stepping roots
cake-walking
in this promised place. 
Where I go is where I am now.
Don’t mess with me: you hurt yourself.
In the middle of my stride now. I am walking
yes indeed I am walking through my own house.
I am walking yes indeed on my own piece of road.
Toting my own load
and yours and mine.
I tell you
I feel fine and clear this morning even
when it’s night and a full moon with my thumbprint
on it.
Everything is clamorous and quiet.
            I am the only One here.
            And we don’t break. No indeed.
            Come hell and high water.
            We don’t break
            for nothing.
~~~
1
In which I try to decipher
                          the story it tells,
this syntax of monuments                          flanking the old courthouse:
                                       here, a rough outline
like the torso of a woman                          great with child—                                       a steatite boulder from which                          the Indians girdled the core
                                                     to make of it a bowl,                                       and left in the stone a wound; here,
the bronze figure of Thomas Jefferson,                                       quill in hand, inscribing                          a language of freedom,                                                    a creation story—                                       his hand poised at the word                           happiness. There is not yet an ending,                                       no period—the single mark,
intended or misprinted, that changes                          the meaning of everything.
Here too, for the Confederacy,
                          an obelisk, oblivious
               in its name—a word                          that also meant the symbol
to denote, in ancient manuscripts,               the spurious, corrupt, or doubtful;
                                             at its base, forged                          in concrete, a narrative               of valor, virtue, states' rights. 
Here, it is only the history of a word,                          obelisk,               that points us toward                          what's not there; all of it
palimpsest, each mute object                repeating a single refrain:                Remember this.
~~~
She always got mad at him
every time he came home in the middle of the morning
with his pant legs wet.
She knew he had fallen in the ditch again.
His legs were not strong enough to be straddling ditches.
He was too old to be walking over temporary dikes.
She wished he didn’t do that, but sometimes he had to.
She sometimes imagined him falling over backward in one of the irrigation ditches,
his head hitting hard cement,
his body slowly sinking into the water.
Water that was only three feet deep.
A harmless three feet of water,
where children played,
and ladies sometimes sat and dipped their feet,
especially on hot summer evening.
She knew he would drown,
she knew it was bound to happen sometime.
As far as the eye could see,
flat, green fields appearing to end at the foot of distant mountains.
Mountains, a reminder of what the fields once looked like.
Fields saturated with water pulled from its secret storage place
beneath the earth’s surface.
We are called “the people of the cotton fields”
because of the labor our families did.
For us there was no reservation, no Housing & Urban Development, no tribal support.
We were a people segregated in row houses
all lined up along the roads of our labor.
It is a muggy summer evening.
My father, my sister, and I sit on the east side of the house finding shade against the still-hot setting sun.
The change from brilliant white sun to blue and gold sunset and finally,
to warm darkness, a change we anticipate for brief relief.
On this evening the anticipation is shattered.
A boy comes to the house. He gestures for my father to come to him, out of our hearing.
With what the boy says to him my father moves quickly.
As quickly as his stiff back and legs can move him.
Back and legs broken and fused from when he was a cowboy.
He rushes by, throwing the kitchen door open, grabbing his hat.
He gets into his truck and drives away.
We pay him no mind other than for the fact that he is rushing.
A second later my mother comes out of the house and with a single motion pulls her apron off.
In a tone I recognize as signifying something is wrong, she instructs us to come with her.
She starts in the direction of a cotton field a few hundred yards from our house.
My sister and I walk beside her.
Saying nothing.
Her hands wring the towel she carries with her.
This towel, a multipurpose kind of thing.
Women carry it to fan themselves,
to wipe sweat, to cover their heads and eyes from the sunlight, to shoo away kids, dogs, flies.
I remember once a student of mine, out of habit, brought her towel with her to summer school at the university.
Whenever we see each other on campus during a summer session we always laugh about it.
We continue to walk, stepping over the ends of rows of cotton.
Rows of cotton my family and I know well.
In early summer we walk the rows to thin out the growth,
and later we walk to chop the weeds somehow immune to chemicals.
And in the winter, at least before the machinery, we pick the cotton from their stalks.
Now I can’t begin to imagine how many miles we have all walked,
up and back, up and back along these rows.
We walk alongside her.
The setting sun maintains a continuous pounding on our backs,
the humidity from the damp fields is warm, it rests on our shoulders like tired, sweaty arms.
She heads toward the irrigation ditch.
The ditch is dirt, not cement, it is wide, muddy, and slippery.
The water is shallow.
I see my father’s truck pulling up on the opposite side.
In the front seat there are women, and in the back, men.
The men wedge their feet in between plastic and aluminum irrigation pipes, mud-caked shovels, boots, and hoes.
Equipment in the back of his truck all for the purposes of working fields.
I remember the hoe he carried.
It was big, with a blade that held an edge well and got the work done.
I recall purchasing a hoe for my home and being particularly unsatisfied with the craftsmanship.
“They call this a hoe?” I said to my husband. It had a skinny neck, and no blade to speak of.
The handle was too thin, causing blisters.
Once in awhile I look around for the type of hoe my father carried. I found one once, but didn’t have money to buy it.
In slow motion,
weighed down by the heat,
the women begin to slide across the bench of the pickup truck.
They slowly step out of the cab, appearing as a single long strand of woman, emerging.
In cautious unison they walk toward the edge of the ditch.
My mother, as if connected to them by an invisible string,
is pulled toward them from the opposite side.
Their movement is dreamlike. They peer into the muddy water.
And as if with a shared nervous system, their hands motion the towel each is carrying,
motion it to just above their eyes, covering their faces.
With a single vocal act they release from their depths a hard, deep, mournful wail.
This sound breaks the wave of bright summer light above the green cotton fields.
~~~
This song is not a language,
Not a thing to be remembered,
The field-holler tradition of
Teeth and knees
Cursing wind,
A concert hall of   bloody hands
Spilling the earth,
Strangling dirt,
Sledgehammer curses
Of  men busted open.
On Parchman Farm
You could hear it coming
Up through the trees,
The hammering pulpit of
Crooning men and sweat,
The tender meat of palms
Pulped like plums.
Them men gulped down the
Dawn dew air,
Let it catch in their throats,
Broke the sunrise up and
Sang hymns like hexes:Be my woman gal, I’ll beeee your maaaaaaan    ...    
And the killing fields of  Mississippi
Fizzled down to juke joints and
The hothouse music of illegal clubs
With thick women they loved outright and
Played cards with and
Gave bourbon to when their hands
Didn’t hold sorrow like
Pickaxes and the railroad was
Just a railroad,
A way to ride north if  you could
Get your money right.
Redbone gals with rosewater sweat,
When they lifted their knees
Sunflower County was a heaven
They believed in.Stick to the promise, gal, that you maaaaaade meeeeee    ...    
Steady now,
They turned back the clock on
Their hard, hard hands,
Let the memory of fresh linen and
Ladies’ slips like gossamer
Wings, a parade of  plump thighs,
The juju thrust of  furious bones
Spread like grease
Across starched-white sheets,
Midwife them out of ol’ Parchman Farm
And back to the cockfights and gambling,
Back when they had ambition,
Back when they had a sweet woman
To hold, her fat wrists
Soft as butter,
Limp as rain.When she walk, she reel and rock beeeeeehind
Ain’t that enough to make a convict smiiiiiiiiile.
~~~
    Betty, if I set out to write this poem about you
it might turn out instead
to be about me
or any one of
my female relatives
it might turn out to be
about this young native girl
growing up in rural Alberta
in a town with fewer Indians
than ideas about Indians,
in a town just south of the 'Aryan Nations'
 
     it might turn out to be
about Anna Mae Aquash, Donald Marshall or Richard Cardinal,
it might even turn out to be
about our grandmothers,
beasts of burden in the fur trade
skinning, scraping, pounding, packing,
left behind for ‘British Standards of Womanhood,'
left for white-melting-skinned women,
not bits-of-brown women
left here in this wilderness, this colony.
 
     Betty, if I start to write a poem about you
it might turn out to be
about hunting season instead,
about 'open season' on native women
it might turn out to be
about your face       young and hopeful
staring back at me      hollow now
from a black and white page
it might be about the 'townsfolk'    (gentle word)
townsfolk who 'believed native girls were easy'
and 'less likely to complain if a sexual proposition led to violence.'
 
     Betty, if I write this poem.
 
~~~
My daddy understood
the richness of color and
shunned my oldest sister’s
whitewashed birth.Who the white child belong to?
He asked in the delivery ward
shaming himself as the source.
Shadism colored my siblings’ perception.
An ideal hierarchy with light skin the pinnacle
after the paper bag test proved me cocoa dark
and of less value.
Burned biscuit defined what I could not
erase. When they tired of sidewalk chalk
and strike ’em out
their feigned indignation
made my smile give and give
unsuccessfully, reaching eyes
where ducts emptied silently.
Turned my cheek
on juvenile acceptance
and sibling rivalry
reminding myself thatAfter all, I’m the real thing
and it comforted me.
~~~
They look at the photo and agree that’s dad in the class photo of Ip Man, Wing Chun master.
I look at the face and cannot say it looks like him to me.
My brother asked his forensics detective coworker to look at the face.
Mom thinks it’s him too, he says proudly.
My mother often watches game shows and says look it looks like (insert neighbor) and I look up to see some not-even-ballpark bone structure.
What was my father’s face like when he left his country?
What was his face like when, alone, he made the pork and peas, washed socks.
This wretched neighborhood, when I say hi to white people on the street they don’t say hi back. Chinese either.
Who has mastered this face, no sweeping lashes, just one naked thought after another.
The young people I think I smile at in a dark crowd who walk away as if my face said, You’re standing in my way move along.
I’d dress as Robert Smith or The Crow in high school and friends would say, But you look normal that way.
I mention my Han melancholy and you murmur, No, Grandpa told Uncle DiDi we’re Mongolian, I thought you knew?
You who had permission to deck any lump on the bus, who got asked later, Are you okay?
I walk down the street feeling overly safe, I dgaf and want to magic you my extra.
But my face fails me with a weak best, what friends know as “powered- down mode.”What in the world is she thinking is what I sometimes ask myself, says a colleague about this face.
What I partly see, what partly disappears in the mirror.
~~~
Do you see current events differently because you were raised by a black father and are married to a black man?



I am surprised they haven’t left already —  things have gotten downright frosty, nearly unbearable.A mob of them is apparently mouthing off outsidewhen I put down my newspaper and we all gatherto stand beside my daughter in the bay of kitchen windows. Quiscalus quiscula: this name sounds like a spell which, after its casting,will make things crumble into a complement of unanswerable questions. Though, if you need me to tell you God’s honest truth, I know nothing but their common name the morning we watch them attackour feeder. I complain about the mess they leave. HullsI’ll have to sweep up or ignore. My father —  who I am thankful is still alive — says We could usea different kind of seed
~~~
In the America of the dream

the first rise of the moon

swings free of the ocean,

and she reigns in her shining flesh

over a good, great valley

of plumped, untrampled grasses

and beasts with solemn eyes,

of lovers infallibly pitched

in their ascendant phase.

 

In this America, death

is virginal also, roaming

the good, great valley

in his huge boots, his shadow

steady and lean, his pistol

silver, his greeting clear

and courteous as a stranger’s

who looks for another, a mind

to share his peaceable evenings.

 

Dreaming, we are another

race than the one which wakes

in the cold sweat of fear,

fires wild shots at death.,

builds slippery towers of glass

to head him off, waylays him

with alcohol traps, rides him down

in canyons of sex, and hides

in teetering ghost towns.

 

Dreaming, we are the mad

who swear by the blood of trees

and speak with the tongues of streams

through props of steel and sawdust,

a colony of souls

ravaged by visions, bound

to some wild, secret cove

not yet possessed, a place

still innocent of us.
~~~
Damn, son      he      grunted holding  his    falling      jeans    and      sprinting  sideways   in    high    hay      and
concatenation      He  didn’t      even   want       to   chase      the       favor      he   hadn’t     planned    to   live   forever   he
didn’t    know    he    had    a      fever      thought      it      was     a    true    love   shopping   spree      thought      the cotton
needle    was      a      vaccine      thought      the      Visine      was       tiny      water       and        the     eye       a    reliable
bank       in    the   space     between       seeing        and       being     seen           and     plenty     quenched      and      hesitant
and      addicted      to     fickle    sonance     and    espionage      fake  Prada     real     caught     up      ketchup packets
spilling   from   his   pockets      Dexter    Gordon      flickering      in     his    locket     on      grin       on      roar        on
dimples     and     porridge       this     is     your     typical      roll     out      strategy     pretend      to    shift    into    helpless
chaos     and    laugh           when     they      fall      for       it       such      tall      grass      in       Ole    Miss       such    that
mystery   of    the  body     of     the    boy     of      the      ball               is     leaping      violently         into      pinstripes—
He      was      isolated      yes      but    he   never     made     us     nervous       he    was  never    convicted         he      never
took      the      backpack             he never  made   it  to Rikers      he      never      did   come   back
~~~
“It isn’t a game for girls,”
he said, grabbing a fifth
with his right hand,
the wind with his left.
“For six days
I raced Jack Daniels.
He cheated, told jokes.
Some weren’t even funny.
That’s how come he won.
It took a long time
to reach this Yellow River.
I’m not yet thirty,
or is it thirty-one?
Figured all my years
carried the same hard thaw.
Out here, houselights hid
deep inside the trees.
For awhile I believed this road
cut across to Spring Creek
and I was trucking home.
I could kid you now,
say I ran it clean,
gasping on one lung,
loaded by a knapsack
of distrust and hesitation.
I never got the tone
in all the talk of cure.
I sang Honor Songs, crawled
the railroad bridge to Canada.
Dizzy from the ties,
I hung between both worlds.
Clans of blackbirds circled
the nearby maple trees.
The dark heart of me said
no days more than these.
As sundown kindled the sumacs,
stunned by the river’s smile,
I had no need for heat,
no need to feel ashamed.
Inside me then the sound
of burning leaves. Tell them
I tumbled through a gap on the horizon.
No, say I stumbled through a hummock
and fell in a pit of stars.
When rain weakened my stride,
I heard them singing
in a burl of white ash,
took a few more days to rave
at them in this wood.
Then their appaloosas nickered
in the dawn and they came
riding down a close ravine.
Though the bottle was empty,
I still hung on. Foxtails beat
the grimace from my brow
until I took off my pain
like a pair of old boots.
I became a hollow horn filled
with rain, reflecting everything.
The wind in my hand
burned cold as hoarfrost
when my grandfather nudged me
and called out
my Lakota name.”
               In memory of Mato Heholgeca’s grandson
~~~
This prairie holds us
with its plainness.
An ugly wife.
We would not stay but children comfort us
and we need this flatness.
On our table
a carp with a tumor
on its lip,
larva eating its side.
An old man laughs,
one silver tooth
in his head
like a galvanized
watertank.
We are driven back
into the land,
our raccoon faces
banded around the eyes
with motorcycle goggles.
Every car we had
rusting in the yard.
We saddle the buffalo
and say we are captives.
This barrenness holds
us down like a wife.
~~~
Even alleged militants blame the vanishing of the summer sea ice on “Ghosts” (short version) by Albert Ayler. He disappeared while he was getting his sound together. No one knows what happened but the water high in increments like a crown around his cries and glass is a liquid and you have to forgive your parents for whatever it is and they have to forgive themselves I would like to use this craft to fly with him I feel that saddle the morning after and try — again — warm in the habit of our warning and yearning for more of  them until          We finally need to see this reckoning But when it’s time I’m not ready and when I’m ready it’s not time — that’s fate. And blind in the halo of so-what, so-what, we make it a future I say, I don’t know who you are. I say, It don’t matter at this point, I do it all for you anyways (long run) — gorgeous photographs of industrial ruins so lush you want to lick them, be them, become a trend. Crushed under the debris, an instrument is so tender it breaks and mends in the same note. Becoming men is like that, degrading, uplifting, denial, lazily caving in Isis and ice until all of our guesses are obsolete we can’t see nobody who isn’t disappearing
~~~
Now you are strong
And we are but grapes aching with ripeness.
Crush us!
Squeeze from us all the brave life
Contained in these full skins.
But ours is a subtle strength
Potent with centuries of yearning,
Of being kegged and shut away
In dark forgotten places.
 
We shall endure
To steal your senses
In that lonely twilight
Of your winter’s grief.
~~~
/ 
 
You are in the dark, in the car, watching the black-tarred street being swallowed by speed; he tells you his dean is making him hire a person of color when there are so many great writers out there.
 
You think maybe this is an experiment and you are being tested or retroactively insulted or you have done something that communicates this is an okay conversation to be having.
 
Why do you feel okay saying this to me? You wish the light would turn red or a police siren would go off so you could slam on the brakes, slam into the car ahead of you, be propelled forward so quickly both your faces would suddenly be exposed to the wind.
 
As usual you drive straight through the moment with the expected backing off of what was previously said. It is not only that confrontation is headache producing; it is also that you have a destination that doesn’t include acting like this moment isn’t inhabitable, hasn’t happened before, and the before isn’t part of the now as the night darkens  and the time shortens between where we are and where we are going.
 
/
 
When you arrive in your driveway and turn off the car, you remain behind the wheel another ten minutes. You fear the night is being locked in and coded on a cellular level and want time to function as a power wash. Sitting there staring at the closed garage door you are reminded that a friend once told you there exists a medical term — John Henryism — for people exposed to stresses stemming from racism. They achieve themselves to death trying to dodge the build up of erasure. Sherman James, the researcher who came up with the term, claimed the physiological costs were high. You hope by sitting in  silence you are bucking the trend.
 
/
 
When the stranger asks, Why do you care? you just stand there staring at him. He has just referred to the boisterous teenagers in Starbucks as niggers. Hey, I am standing right here, you responded, not necessarily expecting him to turn to you.
 
He is holding the lidded paper cup in one hand and a small paper bag in the other. They are just being kids. Come on, no need to get all KKK on them, you say.
 
Now there you go, he responds.
 
The people around you have turned away from their screens. The teenagers are on pause. There I go? you ask, feeling irritation begin to rain down. Yes, and something about hearing yourself repeating this stranger’s accusation in a voice usually reserved for your partner makes you smile.
 
/
 
A man knocked over her son in the subway. You feel your own body wince. He’s okay, but the son of a bitch kept walking. She says she grabbed the stranger’s arm and told him to apologize: I told him to look at the boy and apologize. And yes, you want it to stop, you want the black child pushed to the ground to be seen, to be helped to his feet and be brushed off, not brushed off  by the person that did not see him, has never seen him, has perhaps never seen anyone who is not a reflection of himself.
 
The beautiful thing is that a group of men began to stand behind me like a fleet of  bodyguards, she says, like newly found uncles and brothers.
 
/
 
The new therapist specializes in trauma counseling. You have only ever spoken on the phone. Her house has a side gate that leads to a back entrance she uses for patients. You walk down a path bordered on both sides with deer grass and rosemary to the gate, which turns out to be locked.
 
At the front door the bell is a small round disc that you press firmly. When the door finally opens, the woman standing there yells, at the top of her lungs, Get away from my house. What are you doing in my yard?
 
It’s as if a wounded Doberman pinscher or a German shepherd has gained the power of speech. And though you back up a few steps, you manage to tell her you have an appointment. You have an appointment? she spits back. Then she pauses. Everything pauses. Oh, she says, followed by, oh, yes, that’s right. I am sorry.
 
I am so sorry, so, so sorry.


/
~~~
A collective family myth
passed down across generations
takes on the polished gleam of truth,
and memories become legend.
The legend of black sod-busters
on a piece of red soil they own
in a township of black ranchers.
Their legendary rodeo.grand entry
Two Stars and Stripes flutter into
the arena, carried by two
men in jeans, red shirts, white Stetsons.
Guiding their horses with left hands,
holding the flagstaffs in their rights,
their backs straight and tall, their faces,
their chestnut faces, beautiful
in the light of the setting sun.
After them, two by two,
banners waving, hooves raising dust,
ride the Horse People of Boley,
a varicolored promenade.
They canter once around the ring,
then they circle into the sky.mutton busting
In the cluster of five-year-old
contenders wearing life jackets
and bicycle helmets, paper
numbers safety-pinned to their backs,
you line up one by one for a turn
to hang on tight with your legs squeezed
at the sheep’s broad middle, fingers
holding handfuls of deep, warm wool
as the sheep destiny presents
runs you out to cheering applause.
Whether you’ll fall on top of it,
or it on you, you won’t fall far.
You have no front teeth anyway,
and a brown clown gone pick you up.bareback riding
This horse was bred and born to buck.
He’s a good horse, he’ll give you points.
Gloved hand in the rigging’s handle,
bare brown hand waving in the air,
you whir your spurs at his shoulders
as he leaps, twists, and jolts your bones.
Four seconds or four hundred years.
But if you can get up and slap
the dust off your jeans with your hat,
the future’s eyes, looking at you,
will fill with forevering light:
light that will make generations
of proud brown people remember
the Black Horse People of Boley.bulldogging
In truth there’s seldom a reason
for a man to wrestle a steer,
unless he’s a real ranch cowboy
dealing with ornery power.
Maybe, while rounding up the herd,
he bumps heads with testosterone,
and it’s testosterone-vs.-
testosterone. Bill Pickett learned,
watching dogs on a Boley ranch,
that sometimes you’ve got to bulldog
a hardhead with a kiss of pain.
Today, you slide from horse onto
the fleeing steer, grab his horns, pull
five hundred pounds of muscle down.team roping, calf roping, steer roping
Roping always involves a team,
whether it’s two men or women
or one human and one smart horse.
The aim: to bring down and hog-tie
a big scared baby of a calf
or a full-grown and pissed-off steer.
You gallop out swinging your loop
with one hand, the other holding
the slack and the unneeded reins.
You down him with a careful toss,
tie three of his hooves together,
step back with wide arms and a grin.
A rope isn’t always a noose:
ropes in brown hands can be lassos.saddle bronc riding
It’s not the leather riding gloves
and it’s not the fringed buckskin chaps,
not the worn-in and dusty boots,
not the spurs’ blunted silver stars,
not the 10x wide-brimmed straw hat
(both winged helmet and regal crown):
it’s not clothes that make the cowboy.
It’s something behind a bronzed face,
in the level gaze from dark eyes,
and, of course, it’s heart that puts you,
the reins in one hand, one hand free,
waving with the horse’s rhythm,
your heels spurring from neck to flank,
on this bronc called America.barrel racing
Thunder explodes out of the chute.
Mane and tail whip in the speed wind,
agile hooves pound a swift tempo
circling around the first barrel.
One hand grips the horn, the other
communicates with the taut reins,
though your thighs give the best guidance,
telling your horse to maneuver
in circles that hug the barrels.
Three barrels, a tight cloverleaf
you gallop through with one joined will.
This contest pits you and your horse
against the clock and your best time.
Sister, your dreadlocks are flying!pony express
Before telegraph, news traveled
from mouth to ear, from hand to hand.
News arrived old. From sea to sea
took weeks, unless carried by boys
stationed along the stagecoach route
to race a cross-country relay.
Your pulse gallops toward the handoff,
when your teammate takes the baton
and the noise and flurry go on
without you. Your leg run, you and
your horse (your partner, your friend) stand
encompassed in adrenalin,
watching, as the Ancestors must,
unable to help, but cheering.tennessee walker
Let’s hear it for the barrel men,
for the bullfighters, for the clowns,
for the men on the side ready
to run toward trouble. Give it up
for the musical director
(thanks for the hip-hop, bro!). And for
the announcer and all the folks
cheering in the stands. That baby
wearing a tiny cowboy hat.
That man the same black as his horse,
in that white suit and fedora.
His Tennessee Walker’s proud gait
as he nods to his own rhythm,
tail an ebony waterfall.bull riding
Boley bulls are bred for bucking,
bred to be mean, to be “Bad Boys.”
They teach you to sit strong, hold on,
and with one hand reach for the sky.
After riding a Boley bull
a cowboy thinks, Hell, I’ve been there.
I’ve held the bull-rope, raked my spurs,
while that bad boy tried to kill me.
A ton of Brahma seeing red
gives you a whole new perspective,
a who-you-think-you-talking-to
fearlessness. You’ve seen the bull’s eye:
you know you can’t die more than once.
You’ve lived through eight Mississippis.
~~~
Prairie winds blaze through her tumbled belly, and Emmett’s
red yesterdays refuse to rename her any kind of mother.
A pudge-cheeked otherwise, sugar whistler, her boy is
(through the fierce clenching mouth of her memory) a
grays-and-shadows child. Listen. Once she was pretty.
Windy hues goldened her skin. She was pert, brown-faced,
in every wide way the opposite of the raw, screeching thing
chaos has crafted. Now, threaded awkwardly, she tires of thesorries, the Lawd have mercies. Grief’s damnable tint
is everywhere, darkening days she is no longer aware of.
She is gospel revolving, repeatedly emptied of light, pulled
and caressed, cooed upon by strangers, offered pork and taffy.
Boys in the street stare at her, then avert their eyes, as if she
killed them all, shipped every one into the grips of Delta. She sits,
her chair carefully balanced on hell’s edge, and pays for sanity in
kisses upon the conjured forehead of her son. Beginning with A,
she recites (angry, away, awful) the alphabet of a world gone red.
Coffee scorches her throat as church ladies drift about her room,
black garb sweating their hips, filling cups with tap water, drinking,
drinking in glimpses of her steep undoing. The absence of a black
roomful of boy is measured, again, again. In the clutches of coffee,
red-eyed, Mamie knows their well-meaning murmur. One says She
a mama, still. Once you have a chile, you always a mama.
~~~
Alone, unfriended, on a foreign shore,
 Behold an hapless, melancholy maid,Begging her scanty fare from door to door,
 With piteous voice, and humbly bended head.Alas! her native tongue is known to few:
 Her manners and her garb excite suprise;The vulgar stare to see her bid adieu;
 Her tattered garments fix their curious eyes.Cease, cease your laugh, ye thoughtless vain;Why sneer at yon poor Indian’s pain?’Tis nature’s artless voice that speaks:Behold the tear bedew her cheeks!Imploring actions, bursting sighs,Reveal enough to British eyes.
~~~
With razorblade eyes                       The Filipina is most sincereWith too much water                      And will make a very good wife.With animal teeth                            The Filipina is a loyal partner,We sometimes kill                            Deserving of all your love.With splintered hands                    The Filipina is the total package,With too much life                           Much more than meets the eye.With ribcage unlocked                   The Filipina is not for you,We wither your roots                     If  you cannot handle her claws.
~~~
Blow back the breath of the bird,     Scatter the song through the air, There was music you never heard,     And cannot hear anywhere.  It was not the sob of the vain     In the old, old dark so sweet, (I shall never hear it again,)     Nor the coming of fairy feet.  It was music and music alone,     Not a sigh from a lover’s mouth; Now it comes in a phantom moan     From the dead and buried South.  It was savage and fierce and glad,     It played with the heart at will; Oh, what a wizard touch it had—     Oh, if I could hear it still!  Were they slaves? They were not then;     The music had made them free. They were happy women and men—     What more do we care to be?  There is blood and blackness and dust,     There are terrible things to see, There are stories of swords that rust,     Between that music and me.  Dark ghosts with your ghostly tunes     Come back till I laugh through tears; Dance under the sunken moons,     Dance over the grassy years!  Hush, hush—I know it, I say;     Your armies were bright and brave, But the music they took away     Was worth—whatever they gave.
~~~
Why and by whose power were you sent?
What do you see that you may wish to steal?
Why this dancing? Why do your dark bodies
Drink up all the light? What are you demanding
That we feel? Have you stolen something? Then
What is that leaping in your chest? What is
The nature of your mission? Do you seek
To offer a confession? Have you anything to do
With others brought by us to harm? Then
Why are you afraid? And why do you invade
Our night, hands raised, eyes wide, mute
As ghosts? Is there something you wish to confess?
Is this some enigmatic type of test? What if we
Fail? How and to whom do we address our appeal?
~~~
Tell me a story, father please,
And then I sat upon his knees.
Then answer’d he,—“what speech make known,
Or tell the words of native tone,
Of how my Indian fathers dwelt,
And, of sore oppression felt;
And how they mourned a land serene,
It was an ever mournful theme.”
 
Yes, I replied,—I like to hear,
And bring my father’s spirit near;
Of every pain they did forego,
Oh, please to tell me all you know.
In history often I do read,
Of pain which none but they did heed.
 
He thus began. “We were a happy race,
When we no tongue but ours did trace,
We were in ever peace,
We sold, we did release—
Our brethren, far remote, and far unknown,
And spake to them in silent, tender tone.
We all were then as in one band,
We join’d and took each others hand;
Our dress was suited to the clime,
Our food was such as roam’d that time,
Our houses were of sticks compos’d;
No matter,—for they us enclos’d.
 
But then discover’d was this land indeed
By European men; who then had need
Of this far country. Columbus came afar,
And thus before we could say Ah!
What meaneth this?—we fell in cruel hands.
 
Though some were kind, yet others then held bands
Of cruel oppression. Then too, foretold our chief,—
Beggars you will become—is my belief.
We sold, then some bought lands,
We altogether moved in foreign hands.
 
Wars ensued. They knew the handling of firearms.
Mothers spoke,—no fear this breast alarms,
They will not cruelly us oppress,
Or thus our lands possess.
Alas! it was a cruel day; we were crush’d:
Into the dark, dark woods we rush’d
To seek a refuge.
 
My daughter, we are now diminish’d, unknown,
Unfelt! Alas! No tender tone
To cheer us when the hunt is done;
Fathers sleep,—we’re silent every one.
 
Oh! silent the horror, and fierce the fight,
When my brothers were shrouded in night;
Strangers did us invade—strangers destroy’d
The fields, which were by us enjoy’d.
 
Our country is cultur’d, and looks all sublime,
Our fathers are sleeping who lived in the time
That I tell. Oh! could I tell them my grief
In its flow, that in roaming, we find no relief.
 
I love my country, and shall, until death
Shall cease my breath.
 
Now daughter dear I’ve done,
Seal this upon thy memory; until the morrow’s sun
Shall sink, to rise no more;
And if my years should score,
Remember this, though I tell no more.”
~~~
 
~~~
somebody coming in blackness
like a star
and the world be a great bush
on his head
and his eyes be fire
in the city
and his mouth be true as time
 
he be calling the people brother
even in the prison
even in the jail
 
i’m just only a baptist preacher
somebody bigger than me coming
in blackness like a star
~~~
The difference between poetry and rhetoric
is being ready to kill
yourself
instead of your children.
I am trapped on a desert of raw gunshot wounds
and a dead child dragging his shattered black
face off the edge of my sleep
blood from his punctured cheeks and shoulders
is the only liquid for miles
and my stomach
churns at the imagined taste while
my mouth splits into dry lips
without loyalty or reason
thirsting for the wetness of his blood
as it sinks into the whiteness
of the desert where I am lost
without imagery or magic
trying to make power out of hatred and destruction
trying to heal my dying son with kisses
only the sun will bleach his bones quicker.
A policeman who shot down a ten year old in Queens
stood over the boy with his cop shoes in childish blood
and a voice said “Die you little motherfucker” and
there are tapes to prove it. At his trial
this policeman said in his own defense
“I didn't notice the size nor nothing else
only the color”. And
there are tapes to prove that, too.
Today that 37 year old white man
with 13 years of police forcing
was set free
by eleven white men who said they were satisfied
justice had been done
and one Black Woman who said
“They convinced me” meaning
they had dragged her 4'10'' black Woman's frame
over the hot coals
of four centuries of white male approval
until she let go
the first real power she ever had
and lined her own womb with cement
to make a graveyard for our children.
I have not been able to touch the destruction
within me.
But unless I learn to use
the difference between poetry and rhetoric
my power too will run corrupt as poisonous mold
or lie limp and useless as an unconnected wire
and one day I will take my teenaged plug
and connect it to the nearest socket
raping an 85 year old white woman
who is somebody's mother
and as I beat her senseless and set a torch to her bed
a greek chorus will be singing in 3/4 time
“Poor thing. She never hurt a soul. What beasts they are.”
~~~
Sex is always monstrous. Blood appears in the air next to the body but nobody asks a question about the body. “Please touch me there. More. Oh god.” For a hitchhiker, the problem of the boudoir is transferred to a makeshift, itchy, unsafe space on the verge of a New Mexico highway. It is often the sex of another era, in which the socks and dress shirt/blouse are not necessarily removed.
I hitchhiked in the beginning because it seemed glamorous to me, ultra-American, like a Christian with an entrenched migraine who resorts to brand-name anti-inflammatories when prayer does not do the trick. At first, my encounters on the thoroughfares of your country were quotidian; after all, it is not really hitchhiking to buy a Greyhound ticket three weeks in advance then have a going-away party in a dorm with a banner and balloons. Again, this is an example of departure in another time. As a foreign student on scholarship, it was an ordinary matter to file for an extension for the completion of a thesis on Salman Rushdie’s early works. Nevertheless: “How can we keep tabs on these JI visa holders, who come over here and . . . the university, as an institution, really needs to be more accountable. We need a database and we need a system of checks and balances to make sure any change of address is verified by at least two pieces of information. They need to do their course work and then they need to go home.”
I didn’t want to go home. This is a boring sentence. Perhaps for you Oregon is a calming word, evoking images of blackberry pie, ocean vistas, and the capture of suspected felons. I had never heard the word Oregon before. Like the distance of Scotland from London, it seemed impossibly far. A beautiful hazard: to go and keep going. How can I put this? In England, nobody ever, ever, ever did this. I, who once drove straight to Glasgow with a thermos of instant coffee mixed with milk and sugar, in a dinged-up Datsun Cherry, was considered an anomaly. “Are you demented? Why do you want to drive in a car to bloody Scotland? It’s seven hours on the M1, man!” Though, outwardly, I was wan and somewhat reticent, I . . . no, I was. My sexual experience consisted of lying under an elm tree in Hyde Park at the age of seventeen and being told by an undergraduate student of the London School of Economics that my breasts in that position, from that angle, resembled two fried eggs. We were meeting in a park as per the era. I am sure contemporary Punjabi-British teenagers are fearless individuals, undaunted by the prospect of community censure. Back then we met by the iron-wrought gate on a park bench, on a path built for seventeenth-century promenades. It is always a century. In my century, sex was a field of restraint and intensity unsurpassed by anything except drinking coffee in a foreign country like Scotland or Wales and borrowing my father’s car forever. “Are you out of your bleeding head? Your dad’s going to skin you alive!”
In some sense, this (driving) is the opposite of hitchhiking, in which the interior of the car is always unfamiliar. The day was real in a different way back then, in the way that it sensitized me to risk, a kind of twin to permisson. Two black swans: that day and this one, history and fiction, what I went for and what I really wanted, which I didn’t know until I got there by which time it was impossible to consider the long journey home as either practical or sensible, considering the trouble I was already in and the rain, which had started to come down in a series of reddish sheets; the streetlamps were pink.
On Prince Street, in Glasgow, I saw the sign for American style pizza and went down the steps to the basement café. The tables were coated with green plastic. There was hot tea, which the waitress slung down my gullet with a funnel as I focused my eye on a laminated print of a white, blocky rose with a pink dot at its center. “Charles Rennie Mackintosh,” the waitress, pronouncing “osh” so that it rhymed with horse. “Are you from India?” “Would you like some jam with that scone? I bet they don’t have scones in India, do they?” “More tea? I heard you have a lot of tea, over there, isn’t that right?”
Plan b: The extension of my throat. The euphoria of theft. Other countries with their sayings and beliefs. The original plan, formulated by my father during his morning communte across London: marrying a British-born Hindu Brahmin dentist with brown skin, but not too brown, and rosy cheeks. Note on the mantelpiece, tucked behind the marble figurine of Shiva: what is forthcoming under the original plan? Extraction? What kind of sex is possible on the dentist’s chair late at night for that girl, your girl, who nervously asks for a blanket? She has her socks on. She’s shivering. It is sometimes sex when you touch yourself beneath the proffered blanket clearly not washed between patients, but in this scene the limbs of the dentist’s young Asian bride are rigid and smell faintly of wintergreen-scented nail polish or mouthwash. Dad, “please don’t swallow.” Rinse then spit. Spit then swallow.
I could not go home and so, after a brief visit to the Hill House—Charles Rennie Mackintosh’s art deco home on the Firth of Clyde, where he painted geometric rosebuds forever in a kind of frenzy, as it seemed from the décor—I turned left and kept driving. I drove my car into the Atlantic and kept driving, my chest very tight beneath the surface. It was difficult to feel anything or really to see, and so I can only say that I went into a damaging ocean. This is going. Damaged, washed up on the mythical shores of New Jersey a few days later, my car failed to start. This is later, when the car stopped, and, looking up from my hands, white-knuckled on the steering wheel, I realized that I was okay.
Now I am here, in the future of color. I’m sorry I do not have more to say about the period of submergence that preceded my arrival. I am not interested in it. I do not recall it. I . . . It was only when my car stopped that I realized what I had to do, on my own terms, with my own two legs: get going. Is that how you say it? Get up and go. The destiny of my body as separate from my childhood: I came here to hitchhike. I came here to complete a thing I began in another place. Removing wet pages from my rucksack, I lay them on the shore, securing them with beautiful shells and pebbles. When they dried, I folded them into squares and put them in my pocket, next to my body. Misshapen, exhilarated, I said get. I said go. Get up now and go. “Are you okay?” “Do you need a ride somewhere?” “Let me look in the trunk. I might have something in there. Here you go. You’re shivering! Do you need to go to the hospital? At least let me buy you a cup of coffee.”
~~~
The art of war teaches us to rely not on the chance of the enemy not attacking but rather on the fact that we have made our position unassailable.
          —Sun Tzu



My father called me a chink
so I’d know how to receive it.
So I wouldn’t be surprised.
 Therefore the good soldier will be terrible in his onset and prompt in his decision.
 
In the wall, I bricked up my secret.
So it would gush forth. I did this for effect.
So you would know me.
 On the day of battle your soldiers might weep bedewing their garments.
 
But it grew like a bullet loving its flowerstain.
It happened nonetheless.
 But let them at once be brought to bay.
 
Because you are simply my medic watching me.
I’m a poem someone else wrote for me.
All of the characters “beautiful and flawed.”
 When we are near, we must make the enemy believe we are far.
 
My sister said, you can forget our way of life?
I said yes and was annoyed. She ran away and I was desperate for her.
I was screaming into the mindspeaker.
 When far away, we must make him believe we are near.
 
I said, Christine, christine, christine.
 
~~~
For the earth has spoken,
to you, her magma Creole.
Full-throated syllables, up-
rising from deep down,
an honest elocution —
rudimentary sound: guttural
nouns, forthright, strong,
the rumbled conviction of verbs
unfettered by reticence
as the first poetry of creation.
A secret has passed between you
so wonderfully terrible,
it laid your cities prostrate,
raptured your citizenry.
Now, we look to your remnant
courtesy cable TV
and garble theories thinking
ourselves saved.
Only the wise among us pin
our ears to the ground,
listening in hope of catching
even a half syllable
of the language forming
like a new world on your tongue.
~~~
Border Ghazals



I.
 
I hate, I love, I don’t know how
I’m biracial, I’m torn in two
 
Tonight, he will lock me in fear
In the metal detector of love
 
Rapeflowers, rapeseeds, rapiers
A soldier’s wry offerings
 
He will press his tongue
Into my neighing throat
 
I can speak three dialects badly
I want you now behind the blue door
 
In a slow hovercraft of dreams
I saw Nanking from a bilge
 
Some ashes fell on his lap
I’m afraid it’s my mother
 
The protocol is never to mention her
While we are fucking
 
 
II.
 
The bad conceit, the bad conceit police will arrest you
Twin compasses, twin compasses cannot come
 
Your father is not a car, not a compass and not God
Though he vanished in his sky-blue convertible Galaxy with a blonde
 
He kept crawling back to us, back to us
Each time with a fresh foot mangled
 
One emperor was named Lickety, the other named Split
Suddenly, the soup of chaos makes sense
 
Refugees roaming from tent to tent to tent, looking for love
The banknote is a half note, an octave above God
 
O the great conjugator of curses: shit, shat, have shut!
I have loved you both bowl-cut and shagged
 
There are days when the sun is a great gash
Nights, the moon smokes hashish and falls asleep on your lap
 
Sorry, but your morphing was not satisfactory
Shapeshifter, you choked on your magic scarf
 
 
III.
 
I heard this joke at the bar
An agnostic dyslexic insomniac stayed up all night searching for doG
 
The prosperity sign flips right side up again
The Almanac says this Ox Year we’ll toil like good immigrants
 
Horse is frigid. Mule can’t love
Salmon dead at the redd
 
One leg is stationary, the other must tread, must tread, must tread
The Triads riddled him, then us
 
What is the heart’s past participle?
She would have loved not to have loved
 
I bought you at the corner of Agave and Revolucíon
You wrapped yourself thrice around my green arm and shat!
 
A childless woman can feel the end of all existenceLook, on that bloody spot, Chrysanthemum!
 
Shamanka, fetch your grandmother at the bus stop
Changeling, you are the one I love
~~~
I’ve stopped asking:                                                       ¿Why?
             I’ve let a man whistle
                           from the table for more beer,
& brought it to him
                           with a smile. I’ve slapped
a man & ran
                           while he laughed — 
             atrevida.
I’ve had a miscarriage. I’ve let a man
                                       kiss me
after an abortion
                                       & comforted his hot tears.
I’ve done these things,
                                                       while other girls
work in maquilas
                           piecing together
Dell computer boards,
                                       while other girls
work in brothels,
                           & cake foundation across
their bruised arms,
                                       while other girls
                           ride the bus home alone
             at night, every night,
while other girls are found
             wearing clothes
                           that don’t belong to them, or no
clothes at all. I’ve done all of this
                                       while other girls are found
                           with puta
                                       written in blood across
their broken bellies.
             My mother used to cover
my eyes
                           when we’d walk by girls
working the corner,
             & say:
                                       See how lucky you are,not to have to work
                           like they do? I have been
             muy puta,
                                       have been called puta.Yes, I’d say, very lucky.
~~~
I’m not sure whether it happened in Manitoba or Alberta: go home, they complained, go back, wherever pakis or niggers come from. Was  I seven years old? Was I five? The day was cloudy; there was wind, and a sidewalk underfoot — a path of cement on which we kids marched. In whose place was I a guest, if home wasn’t this flat territory we were on? The hard sidewalk under my shoes, their sense of here.  I walked home alone — I say “home” — I went where my parents paid rent, right? Our house wasn’t ours? Overhead, the sky spread out; the sky’s country was itself. We had moved from Ontario, but my gut got that they didn’t mean there. Immigrants, all of us, we’d chorused in assembly — the more immigrants, the kindlier the country, the folksier the mosaic. First the English and the French, then Western Europeans and the Ukrainians, I guessed, then Chinese and Indians, then the Guyanese and other such Commonwealth stragglers? Eventually we’d bring into “us,” Canadians, a panoply of the human race — so my sweet young self, in Trudeau’s aftermania, believed. Those children’s hate had a kind of guilelessness, however, that conveyed my abjection straight from their Canadian parents’ hearts. I was foreign to clear distinctions between master and savage — to fantasies of homesteaders who, by subjecting trees to their saws, had “mixed their labor” with “unowned” lands. Homesteaders, they called themselves, by principle: “home” was theirs, because they were first to fence it. As if we still were at war with whatever made entreaty against their fencing, my existence existing too near threatened. My very being entreated something before I ever opened my mouth. Get lost! Here kingly kids drink from institution’s cup. Something older than English yea well knows what with his guts he must disagree. Something français dit bon, histoire-là, je parle  au-dessus du poète: domination, Dominion, domicile, home. I protested: one of my parents is here’s occupying family! Don’t blacken  me! Please see my colonists’ blood, inside! They practiced the  policing of reserve on the surface of my brown skin. They practiced homing in on enemy. The clouds above, the sky above, witnessed. The land underfoot said, here was here first. We thought about  beginnings.
~~~
I.
We hang clothes on the line.
His wide trousers and shirt, wind-beat,
roar small thunder from one prairie cloud.
The same rapple of flag on its pole.
Half in fear, half in jest, we laugh.
He calls us crow women.
Our black hair shines in the sun
and in the light from school windows.
He drives his car to town, upsets the dust
on buckboard hills.
We sit on the fence when he is gone.
Does he know we speak of thunder in his shirts?
We cannot do well in his school.
He reads from west to east,
The sun we follow moves the other way.
Crowbar.
Our eyes come loose from words on the page
in narrow rooms of the reservation school.
He perceives and deciphers at once.
For us
written letters will not stay on the page,
but fall like crows from the sky and hit
against the glass windows of the school.
Our day is night when we sit in rows of the classroom.
Leaves in a whirlwind from sumac groves.
Flock of crows are black starts on a white night.
II.
On the porch of the reservation school
the blackbirds walk around our feet,
fly into our head.
They call our secret name.
Dark corridors linger in our mind
We whisper the plains to one another.
We do not talk of what we cannot understand.
Black and white fleckered dresses.
Our face like our fathers.
The sun is no enemy to the eye looking west.
The brush thin as hair of old ones.
It blinds the eye, makes fire on fields,
flashes against windows like silver ribbons
on burial robes.
Hot late into the fall, windy, ready for
cold to sweep in.
The heat seems solid, but totters on the brink
of winter.
We laugh to ourselves when he returns to the
reservation school for girls.
Take his clothes from the line.
Set the table with salt and pepper, spoon, knives.
Cattails and milk-pods in a jar.
We get lard from the basement,
rub a place in the dusty window like a moon in the ancient sky.
III.
One hill larger than the others:
an old buffalo with heavy head and whiskers
nods at the ground,
grazes in my dreams, one blade at a time.
We stay in our stiff white-sheeted beds in the
dormitory room.
Buffalo wander in our dreams.
White night-dresses.
Black pods suspended in sumac groves like crows.
In the sweat lodge of sleep
we make our vision quest,
black as pitch in crevice between crow feathers.
We hang his thunder clothes in sleep,
arms reach above our beds like willows blowing slowly
by the creek.
Quietly we choke,
hold our wounded arms like papooses.
Clothes beat on lines.
Sumac groves and whirl of leaves:
a shadow of our fathers at council fires.
Red leaves, waxy as hay on fields.
We dream of schoolrooms.
Written letters on the wind.
He reads crow-marks on the page but does not know
crow.
~~~
This is how it was:
they had their own churches, their own schools,
schoolbuses, football teams, bands and majorettes,
separate restaurants, in all the public places
their own bathrooms, at the doctor’s
their own waiting room, in the Tribune 
a column for their news, in the village
a neighborhood called Sugar Hill,
uneven rows of unresponsive houses
that took the maids back in each afternoon—
in our homes used the designated door,
on Trailways sat in the back, and at the movie
paid at a separate entrance, stayed upstairs.
Saturdays, a double feature drew the local kids
as the town bulged, families surfacing
for groceries, medicine and wine,
the black barber, white clerks in the stores—crowds
lined the sidewalks, swirled through the courthouse yard,
around the stone soldier and the flag,
and still I never saw them on the street.
It seemed a chivalric code
laced the milk: you’d try not to look
and they would try to be invisible.
Once, on my way to the creek,
I went without permission to the tenants’
log cabin near the barns, and when Aunt Susie
opened the door, a cave yawned, and beyond her square,
leonine, freckled face, in the hushed interior,
Joe White lumbered up from the table, six unfolding
feet of him, dark as a gun-barrel, his head bent
to clear the chinked rafters, and I caught
the terrifying smell of sweat and grease,
smell of the woodstove, nightjar, straw mattress—
This was rural Piedmont, upper south;
we lived on a farm but not in poverty.
When finally we got our own TV, the evening news
with its hooded figures of the Ku Klux Klan
seemed like another movie—King Solomon’s Mines,
the serial of Atlantis in the sea.
By then I was thirteen,
and no longer went to movies to see movies.
The downstairs forged its attentions forward,
toward the lit horizon, but leaning a little
to one side or the other, arranging the pairs
that would own the county, stores and farms, everything
but easy passage out of there—
and through my wing-tipped glasses the balcony
took on a sullen glamor: whenever the film
sputtered on the reel, when the music died
and the lights came on, I swiveled my face
up to where they whooped and swore,
to the smoky blue haze and that tribe
of black and brown, licorice, coffee,
taffy, red oak, sweet tea—
wanting to look, not knowing how to see,
I thought it was a special privilege
to enter the side door, climb the stairs
and scan the even rows below—trained bears
in a pit, herded by the stringent rule,
while they were free, lounging above us,
their laughter pelting down on us like trash.
~~~
And that other time after we got carjacked in L.A. on the way home from Spago. Like a scene outta that movie I don’t like about those hoes I don’t love. It is hard out there for a pimp. A white woman and her brown babies /brown babies in a fancy car with unlocked doors. Most everything is semi-automatic. Two black men hopped into the front row seats and started waving guns like pom-poms.  We made it! We made it! Right against the rim of her porcelain brain. All they wanted was the car and the color. The car was white like her. She saved our lives. Then the penguins came over with a book full of photos of black men, so serious like kings in their mugging, and they asked us to pick which two it was. I was five but I could feel the shrugged evil of it so true and impossible to touch as I pretended to recognize us. We closed our eyes and pointed at you, and said, I don’t know that man. Je ne connais pas cet homme. We saved our lives. We tugged at the flashlight looking for bruises and found you awake, and found a way.
~~~
My first week in Cambridge a car full of white boys
tried to run me off the road, and spit through the window,
open to ask directions. I was always asking directions
and always driving: to an Armenian market
in Watertown to buy figs and string cheese, apricots,
dark spices and olives from barrels, tubes of paste
with unreadable Arabic labels. I ate
stuffed grape leaves and watched my lips swell in the mirror.
The floors of my apartment would never come clean.
Whenever I saw other colored people
in bookshops, or museums, or cafeterias, I’d gasp,
smile shyly, but they’d disappear before I spoke.
What would I have said to them? Come with me? Take
me home? Are you my mother? No. I sat alone
in countless Chinese restaurants eating almond
cookies, sipping tea with spoons and spoons of sugar.
Popcorn and coffee was dinner. When I fainted
from migraine in the grocery store, a Portuguese
man above me mouthed: “No breakfast.” He gave me
orange juice and chocolate bars. The color red
sprang into relief singing Wagner’s Walküre.
Entire tribes gyrated and drummed in my head.
I learned the samba from a Brazilian man
so tiny, so festooned with glitter I was certain
that he slept inside a filigreed, Fabergé egg.
No one at the door: no salesmen, Mormons, meter
readers, exterminators, no Harriet Tubman,
no one. Red notes sounding in a grey trolley town.
~~~
gone from a man claimed the girl
a man named the girl
       got the girl
                     stored up in his room
 
                                           • 
                                     ran away
runaway
                     gone
                                      Dinah   gone


                                           •
                                                                 19 years
                                     of age         about five foot three inchesbrown hair         a cask-shaped mark over her left eye 
                                           •
no one speaks          no speech
       just hatching

 
                                         • 
                                       thought he knew her wellwhen she was in there with him
                                   not a word was spoken
                who to trust now?
thought he knew

                                           • 
                                   presents a gapbetween her upper foreteeth when she smiles
~~~
making promises they can’t keep.
For you, Grandmother, I said I would pull
each invading burr and thistle from your skin,
cut out the dizzy brittle eucalypt,
take from the ground the dark oily poison–
all to restore you happy and proud,
the whole of you transformed
and bursting into tomorrow.
           But where do I cut first?
Where should I begin to pull?
Should it be the Russian thistle
down the hill where backhoes
have bitten? Or African senecio
or tumbleweed bouncing
above the wind? Or the middle finger
of my right hand? Or my left eye
or the other one? Or a slice
from the small of my back, a slab of fat
from my thigh? I am broken
as much as any native ground,
my roots tap a thousand migrations.
My daughters were never born, I am
as much the invader as the native,
as much the last day of life as the first.
I presumed you to be as bitter as me,
to tremble and rage against alien weight.
Who should blossom? Who should receive pollen?
Who should be rooted, who pruned,
who watered, who picked?
Should I feed the white-faced cattle
who wait for the death train to come
or comb the wild seeds from their tails?
Who should return across the sea
or the Bering Strait or the world before this one
or the Mother Ground? Who should go screaming
to some other planet, burn up or melt
in a distant sun? Who should be healed
and who hurt? Who should dry
under summer’s white sky, who should shrivel
at the first sign of drought? Who should be remembered?
Who should be the sterile chimera of earth and of another place,
alien with a native face,
native with an alien face?
~~~
A Creole boy from the West Indies brought,To be in European learning taught,Some years before to Westminster he went,To a Preparatory school was sent.When from his artless tale the mistress foundThe child had not one friend on English ground,She ev’n as if she his own mother were,Made the dark Indian her particular care.Oft on her favourite’s future lot she thought;To know the bent of his young mind she sought,For much the kind preceptress wished to findTo what profession he was most inclined,That where his genius led they might him train;For nature’s kindly bent she held not vain.But vain her efforts to explore his will;The frequent question he evaded still;Till on a day at length he to her came,Joy sparkling in his eyes; and said, the sameTrade he would be those boys of colour were,Who danced so happy in the open air.It was a troop of chimney-sweeping boys,With wooden music and obstreperous noise,In tarnish’d finery and grotesque array,Were dancing in the streets the first of May.
~~~
pick the big bitch:the chick who look likeshe chew screwdrivers.hunched at the lunch table copying homework,shredding syllables with a mouthful of metal.shush the rebelin your throat, that ghost of punk funkingdark circles in the pits of your polo.resist the impulse to shittalk your waythrough ranch dressing and lunchroom throng.bumrush: snatchsong from her ears, tangle of headphonewires and tracks of mangled weave.nevermind uglying her facewith nails or an armful of bangles.she already a jigsaw puzzleof scratch and scar, every exposed partcaked in vaseline. every fold of fatfortified with that free-free — french fries,chickenshit shaped like tenders, cheese sticks.she will slip’n slide youif you don’t come correct.pick you up by your bookbagtill you feel fly, camera phone red eyeswinking your punkass almost famous.but that ain’t your fame to claim.pitbull her ankles till she drop,till ketchup and corn splatter,scatter abstract like techniquefrom our 5th period art class.as she knuckles herself upfrom chickenfeed, ain’t no need to run.instead smile for the video,that soul-clap in your chestis your heart.
~~~
All you violated ones with gentle hearts;
You violent dreamers whose cries shout heartbreak;
Whose voices echo clamors of our cool capers,
And whose black faces have hollowed pits for eyes.
All you gambling sons and hooked children and bowery bums
Hating white devils and black bourgeoisie,
Thumbing your noses at your burning red suns,
Gather round this coffin and mourn your dying swan.
Snow-white moslem head-dress around a dead black face!
Beautiful were your sand-papering words against our skins!
Our blood and water pour from your flowing wounds.
You have cut open our breasts and dug scalpels in our brains.
When and Where will another come to take your holy place?
Old man mumbling in his dotage, crying child, unborn?
~~~
I think of the man who satbehind my grandmother’s sisterin church and told herthe percentage of Indian in her blood, calling it outover the white pews.I wonder what madehim want to count it like coins or a grade.I wish I could hear himnow when I think of hersaying that all the Wampanoag bloodin her body wouldfit in one finger,discounting the percentageit seemed, but why was she such a historian, tracingthe genealogy of the lastWampanoag up to her ownchildren, typing it all on see-throughpaper? Maybe like meshe felt a little self-consciouscaring about whatwe’re made of instead of simply beingsatisfied dressingour bodies and drivingthem around. Maybe she felt shyfor loving someoneshe’d never met, I meanI do. I think of the knife cutting into flesh and the fork carrying it 
~~~
you see so many
                 graveyards around
             these little towns—
                out in the open
                    spaces & places.
                          i guess big cities
                    have not enough space for the
                       living,
                             let alone the dead.
there is so much
water here
and back home in
chicago we would call
them rocks, lying all on the ground(s)
lots of rocks around/but
you would call them
stones here.
see how much smoother
the world is.
the farther east we
go
    the more frequent
are the stops at rich small
quaint towns and the more frequent
are the admonitions to “watch one’s
ticket on the rack above the seat
or to be very sure to take it with
you if you leave your seat!”
      apparently,
                      the very wealthy,
                                               steal.
as i ride the train
watching the many white students
eating out of brown paper
sacks, saving their now
money so that they can
be the very wealthy later
on, also.
~~~
God washes clean the souls and hearts of you,
His favored ones, whose backs bend o’er the soil,
Which grudging gives to them requite for toil
In sober graces and in vision true.
God places in your hands the pow’r to do
A service sweet. Your gift supreme to foil
The bare-fanged wolves of hunger in the moil
Of Life’s activities. Yet all too few
Your glorious band, clean sprung from Nature’s heart;
The hope of hungry thousands, in whose breast
Dwells fear that you should fail. God placed no dart
Of war within your hands, but pow’r to start
Tears, praise, love, joy, enwoven in a crest
To crown you glorious, brave ones of the soil.
~~~
  In the epilogue to The Autobiography of Malcolm X, Alex Haley recounts meeting a pensive Malcolm at the Kennedy airport, watching newly immigrated children “romping and playing” in their sudden home. “By tomorrow night,” Malcolm says to Alex, “they’ll know how to say their first English word—nigger.”
Before cable television arrived in India, America was a white nation. I imagined New England snows dusting California and Miami’s beaches stretched across Appalachia. America was a papier-mâché parody patched together by a cheaply hired prop maker. Geographic accuracy was sacrificed to the interpersonal dramas of Betty and Veronica, and the American banquet was limited to the malted and fried offerings in Pop’s Chock’lit Shoppe, where the Riverdale gang solved the real geopolitical problems of how to get Reggie off Moose’s back with the help of Archie’s fumbling charms. Here, class warfare came with a side of fries. There were rumors of distant family members “settling” in “North Dakota” or “Oklahoma”—names that put themselves together like Lego castles: hard-edged and jutting out with an abrupt L or a particularly pokey K.
Blackness was just a rumor too. Blackness flickered in the background of photographs they sent back from these mysterious locations: here’s an uncle waving at us from a glittering Times Square (Los Angeles); here’s an aunt waving at us mid-way through the soft-focus neon breakfasts with Aunt Jemima’s maple syrup (made from maple leaves); here’s a nephew waving at us next to the poster of a red and white Michael Jordan in a quilted bedroom, his rotund brown body snuggled in tie-dye and tucked into tartan flannel sheets. Blackness was a rumor, that is, until Michael Jackson’s Bad ripped into our consciousness and suddenly, knobby-kneed pre-teens found a way to make stringy curls with coconut oil stolen from their mothers’ kitchens and started moonwalking backwards into my Social Studies classrooms, all snappy crotch and jaunty limbs. We girls rolled our eyes but we kept on watching.
It wasn’t long before Jackson’s unsparing gaze, draped in slick black leather, began replacing the glowing pastel Ganeshes and Saraswatis hanging above study desks. But replacing an elephantine god’s soft paunch with lean, mean celebrity did not save us from our own ignorance of how blackness and brownness were connected through a struggle for economic self-realization and human rights. While kids in Chennai were rehearsing Michael Peters’ signature choreography for “Thriller” and pretending to be zombies—little exemplary half-dead spectacles—Union Carbide was industriously shirking responsibility for the Bhopal Tragedy, which choked thousands of Indians to death, and black mortality was spiking in violent, homicidal protest of the US DEA’s drug buys and cocaine busts.
In other words, Tamilians blinked away Michael Jackson’s blackness. We kept the heat and thunder of his fat synth bass, which found its way into Ilayaraaja’s electric disco in films of the late 1980s like Vetri Vizha and Agni Natchathiram. We kept the ebullient automation of his moves, which became a muscular theme in Prabhu Deva’s blend of baggy breakdance and whimsical terukoothu folk dancing in the 1990s. But we forgot his blackness. In time, the lightning of his presence was replaced by the grey hum of CNN, Cops, Law & Order, and the dull horror of handcuffs on dark wrists. Posters yellowed, cassettes spooled out, and my moonwalking classmates found their scientific calculators and study guides again.
But the rumors of racial difference in George Bush Sr.’s America continued to bloom and wilt in morose cycles in my childhood homes into the 1990s. In damp clusters, it grew like moss under rocks. Rootless, it stretched its stringy arms and held us by the ankles; it grew like mold between bathroom tiles; it spun itself fine and strong, webbing into corners where our brooms couldn’t reach. In time, the mossy rocks lined our after-dinner walks past the hibiscus bushes. In time, a grandmother slipped on the bathroom tiles and stayed in bed, fed conjee by a fatherless girl brought in from the village and the moss grew between her toes and drew her into the earth where they buried the nameless pets and tossed the chicken feathers. In time, the spiders hung so low they fell into pickle jars every time a child fished for a gooseberry or a slice of stony green mango from the brine. And from this brine, in time, we learned to believe that it existed. And as Tamilian families began drifting from the flashy monsoons of India to the June gloom of the California bay or to the sharp wet summers of the Keys, they carried the damp and stench in suitcases and buried it in hushed conversations. They made a poultice of moss and spider web and lodged it in the prayer books, hung it around the children’s necks like a talisman, and they said—as long as she doesn’t marry a black man.  
~~~
When I take my scissors to your shirts,
I am frightened: not that they will whimper
But that they won’t understand the violence I mean.
That kind of violence is the other side of love,
Bright as a light-saber and permanent
As the angel’s swords above Eden
Barring that couple with a final X,
That violence means a love strong as death.
Once Sie ist mein leben, you said, meaning me
And I took those words personally
And knocked upon the door of my heart
Until all its birds flooded to you, in a rush—
Like the Iroquois, I tugged on our peace-pipe,
I wrote your name in smoke. Then went home
With my pockets rolling in shining glass beads,
My pockets so rich with the coin of your country.
 
~~~
After “M. Degas Teaches Art & Science at Durfee Intermediate School, Detroit, 1942” by Philip Levine



The nun stood by the chalkboard and
wrote the word America, underlined
it twice and asked: What do you see here?
Elizabeth shot up her hand and said:It is home. My grandmother came
here so that we could live.
~~~
When black, men drown. They spend their whole lifetimes
justifying the gall of springing the trap, the inconvenience
of slouched denim, of coupling beyond romance or aim.
All the while, the rising murk edges toward their chins.
Hurriedly, someone crafts another scientific tome, a giddy
exploration of the curious dysfunction identifying black
men first as possible, then as necessary. Elegant equations
succumb to a river that blurs quotient and theory, rendering
them unreadable, and the overwhelm easily disappears
the men, their wiry heads glistening, then gulped. All that’s
left is the fathers’ last wisdom, soaked wreckage on silver:Girl, that water ain’t nothing but wet. I’m gon’ be alright.
 
When black men drown, their daughters turn to their mothers
and ask What should I do with this misnamed shiver in myleft shoulder? How should I dress in public? They are weary
of standing at the shore, hands shading their eyes, trying
to make out their own fathers among the thousands bobbing
in the current. The mothers mumble and point to any flailing
that seems familiar. Mostly, they’re wrong. Buoyed by church
moans and comfort food of meat and cream, the daughters
try on other names that sound oddly broken when pressed
against the dank syllables of the fathers’. Drained, with justforward in mind, they walk using the hip of only one parent.
They scratch in their sleep. Black water wells up in the wound.
 
When black men drown, their daughters are fascinated with
the politics of water, how gorgeously a surface breaks
to receive, how it weeps so sanely shut. And the thrashing
of hands, shrieking of names: I was Otis, I was Willie Earl,they called me Catfish. Obsessed by the waltzing of tides,
the daughters remember their fathers—the scorch of beard
electrifying the once-in-a-while kiss, the welts in thick arms,
eyes wearied with so many of the same days wedged behind
them. When black men drown, their daughters memorize all
the steps involved in the deluge. They know how long it takes
for a weakened man to dissolve. A muted light, in the shape
of a little girl, used to be enough to light a daddy’s way home.
 
When black men drown, their daughters drag the water’s floor
with rotting nets, pull in whatever still breathes. They insist their
still-dripping daddies sit down for cups of insanely sweetened
tea, sniffs of rotgut, tangled dinners based on improbable swine.
The girls hope to reacquaint their drowned fathers with the concept
of body, but outlines slosh in drift and retreat. The men can’t get
dry. Parched, they scrub flooded hollows and weep for water
to give them name and measure as mere blood once did. Knocking
over those spindly-legged dinette chairs, they interrupt the failed
feast and mutter Baby girl, gotta go, baby gotta go, their eyes
misted with their own murders. Grabbing their girls, they spit
out love in reverse and stumble toward the banks of some river.
 
When black men drown their daughters, the rash act is the only
plausible response to the brain’s tenacious mouth and its dare: Yes, yes, open your ashed hands and release that wingless child. Note
the arc of the sun-drenched nosedive, the first syllable of the child’s
name unwilling from the man’s mouth, the melody of billow that
begins as blessed clutch. Someone crouching inside the father waits
impatiently for the shutting, the lethargic envelop, and wonders if
the daughter’s wide and realizing eye will ever close to loose him.
It never will, and the man and his child and the daughter and her
father gaze calmly into the wrecked science of each other’s lives.
The sun struggles to spit a perfect gold upon the quieting splash.
The river pulses stylish circles of its filth around the swallow.
 
 
~~~
The fools nearly killed me trying to make me one of them:
a loaded word of  bond with dress codes and penal codes,
postured allegiant to the culture as with the flying of flags
from knots tied on the back of  head wraps worn hoods over.
I can’t gunpoint when the life of this alter ego began though
the possibility can’t be dismissed it began at gunpoint in a way,
with an icy pressure against the temple, the mind splitting into two
tracks while a circus of peers clowned.Going back far too long
now, the camera has blurred my edges in the suggestion of motion
even if  I stood as still as the air does before shit really hits the fan.
I truly went ass-first into fronting indifference, forbade my happy
teeth from public reveal lest they pop the balloon of my perfectly
round face, baby-angled, already read as kind or innocent or soft
from the jump when I wanted respect on my name and women on
my lap like it was said I should. And, shamefully, I did. Several
sistas come to mind here and this doesn’t make me feel good;
a tender touch in the moonlight goes only so far for a shadow.
I had to break it down for myself that being down represented
the fear of having fear.I still shake when the wind blows,
scary as ever, thespian as always in all ways toward the ghost
of a threat or disrespect passed through me then through me,
through a thin skin then through the skin. So, to compensate—
a mask, what Dunbar’s bars beat home way back when about
standing in the presence of the pale folks, only that idea flipped
upside down, what’d be a forced smile slicing the face open like
some summertime melon instead setting scowl folds into smooth
forehead, brown eyes set at the mouth’s corners, fixing it in the
position of silence like rusty nails.If carrying nothing else,
I learned to bring this exact look to the danger because being me
to the fullest would be a liability, provide a sharper image for the
hidden cameras to home in on; yes, just that fast—a certified blue,
strolling up to the screen door with a heavy hand for knocking and
his true hand resting so sweetly on his gun. My gun, I should say,
since in this case the cop is also me, like that little angel or devil
used as sitcom trope.Just imagine the person coming for you
being  you every time: don’t trip, you’d say, unless into the fight.
~~~
My master/father sent me up from South
Carolina to Boston as a nine-year-old.
My mother's illiterate silence has been a death.
I wonder if she still labors in his fields.
His sister, dutiful but cold as snow,
gave me a little room in her house, below
the stairs with the Irish servants, who hated me
for the fatal flaw in my genealogy.
For the first time in my life I am at home
in this bevy of scholars, my first family.
Here, the wallpapers welcome me into every room,
and the mirrors see me, not my pedigree.
My sisters, Jerusha, Emilia, Elizabeth ...
But Mama's unlettered silence is a death.
 
~~~
 I. ADMIRAL
 
Laid out on vellum, the past
is a long wound. It unfolds
five centuries later,
beneath the heavy pens of scholars.
The world shifts and spins
as the Admiral's bronze astrolabe
measures the paths between stars.
The sky is written in the sea's
uneasy mirror, and mermaids
comb their hair in the distance.They are not, he writes, so beautifulas I have heard. He dreams of his own
circuitous route to the Heavens.
God and the Crown. Both want too much.
 
II. GOVERNOR
 
At Guanahani, they swam to the caravel
bearing parrots and balls of cotton thread,
these people so unlike him they could not
not be saved.
                        Too angry to sleep,
the Governor haunts every room in his castle.
The servants whisper in their own tongue.
 
The severed hands of the Taino
wave in clear salt water,
in pink-tinted water.
They wave as the gold mines dry up,
as the Governor leaves Hispaniola in chains.
 
Mermaids, dog-headed men and women
with breastplates of copper—
They draw their bows, and arrows
cover the shore of Columbus's dream.
No, not the Taino, whom he once called in dios.
They touch his white skin.
They have the faces of Christian angels.
~~~
Whenever folks discuss finding themselves,
ya get kinda giggly. Maybe b/c ya found
yrself considering yr Armenian love
who preferred ya in both corset and bindi,
and it was for her ya begrudgingly waxed
yr jungle-scabbard    ...    Ya find yrself in the fret
of reclamation via musks all motherland-misty
(coconut milk, marine accord, mimosa tree). Last
weekend, ya found yrself in leggings to argue
again with yr Dominican love over the tender
texture of Texas tamales. Ya not-so-secretly want
to find yrself in a garden kissing a risk-
taking party until ya feel as good as a half-price
smoothie. Somehow, identity never finds ya
kohl-eyed in magenta blooms photographed
by a mixed-race admirer on a humid evening,
mostly b/c yr too busy galaxy-gazing
to be anyone’s so-fair-and-lovely. Was that
a touch of pride or self-pity? Probably. But ya
just can’t deal with another stranger’s surprise
at yr love of both tequila and mango lassis.
Does yr Guyanese love truly expect ya to replace
the chicken & fish in yr diet with mushrooms
that arbitrarily? You’re so black, yr told pretty
frequently. Ya don’t know what to make of it:
humanity. Ever find yrself advised by
Bangladeshi Brooklynites? Like they know
yr bae Poetry! Loves, let’s stop projecting
insecurities. But maybe it’s like when ya tried
to be cheerful after a famous poet called ya Debbie
Downer for mentioning the hurricanes in yr other
sovereignty? Never don’t find yrself coring
what music can be cleaved from a dull language
into an anomalous nationality. A personal theory:
we all behave oddly around fat titties. Now here
Poetry comes to say she wants to be an ode to what is
muddy. OK, baby. Here’s to dank difficult borders,
gardens of ingrown perennials, fractured fins,
the wings of inner menageries. Here’s to our own
empires of dirt — no one’s pruned-perfumed colonies
of exotic beauty. This is not a poem! Or is it
an efficient exercise in surviving hysteria?
~~~
In 1965 my parents broke two laws of Mississippi;
they went to Ohio to marry, returned to Mississippi.
 
They crossed the river into Cincinnati, a city whose name
begins with a sound like sin, the sound of wrong—mis in Mississippi.
 
A year later they moved to Canada, followed a route the same
as slaves, the train slicing the white glaze of winter, leaving Mississippi.
 
Faulkner’s Joe Christmas was born in winter, like Jesus, given his name
for the day he was left at the orphanage, his race unknown in Mississippi.
 
My father was reading War and Peace when he gave me my name.
I was born near Easter, 1966, in Mississippi.
 
When I turned 33 my father said, It’s your Jesus year—you’re the sameage he was when he died. It was spring, the hills green in Mississippi.
 
I know more than Joe Christmas did. Natasha is a Russian name—
though I’m not; it means Christmas child, even in Mississippi.
~~~
Ain’t of no kind word in what they’ve been telling you.
Heard they call you “Song Bird” these days. Part your beak
and collar the long part of neck with sapphires.
Girl, when are you going to see
you aren’t ever goin’ be one of them. Don’t mean a thing
they pour prosecco in porcelain dishes.
Let you lap leftovers from their palms. Do they pinch
your sides to regurgitate the slug of white cake, candied
roses, the baked breasts of hummingbirds?
Merchant the fetid smell of it into crystal?
I heard their trade ain’t much different
from what is done here at home. Only difference
is they prefer their Black rare and chilled over ice,
fine caviars knifed from the ovaries of the South.
Maybe at night you prowl the Turkish rugs.
Dressed in Schiffli lace, an ankle ribbon tagging
you rare specimen. Do they call you beautiful
for one of your kind? Pocket your songs
and measure your skin for couture.
And for who do you think it will make
statement when worn to the Grand Palais Garnier?
~~~
(1825)



1. CUVIER
                              
               Science, science, science!
               Everything is beautiful
               blown up beneath my glass.
               Colors dazzle insect wings.
               A drop of water swirls
               like marble. Ordinary
               crumbs become stalactites
               set in perfect angles
               of geometry I’d thought
               impossible. Few will
               ever see what I see
               through this microscope.
               Cranial measurements
               crowd my notebook pages,
               and I am moving closer,
               close to how these numbers
               signify aspects of
               national character.
               Her genitalia
               will float inside a labeled
               pickling jar in the Musée
               de l’Homme on a shelf
               above Broca’s brain:
               “The Venus Hottentot.”
               Elegant facts await me.
               Small things in this world are mine.
2.
There is unexpected sun today
in London, and the clouds that
most days sift into this cage
where I am working have dispersed.
I am a black cutout against
a captive blue sky, pivoting
nude so the paying audience
can view my naked buttocks.
I am called “Venus Hottentot.”
I left Capetown with a promise
of revenue: half the profits
and my passage home: A boon!
Master’s brother proposed the trip;
the magistrate granted me leave.
I would return to my family
a duchess, with watered-silk
dresses and money to grow food,
rouge and powders in glass pots,
silver scissors, a lorgnette,
voile and tulle instead of flax,
cerulean blue instead
of indigo. My brother would
devour sugar-studded non-
pareils, pale taffy, damask plums.
That was years ago. London’s
circuses are florid and filthy,
swarming with cabbage-smelling
citizens who stare and query,
“Is it muscle? bone? or fat?”
My neighbor to the left is
The Sapient Pig, “The Only
Scholar of His Race.” He plays
at cards, tells time and fortunes
by scraping his hooves. Behind
me is Prince Kar-mi, who arches
like a rubber tree and stares back
at the crowd from under the crook
of his knee. A professional
animal trainer shouts my cues.
There are singing mice here.
“The Ball of Duchess DuBarry”:
In the engraving I lurch
toward the belles dames, mad-eyed, and
they swoon. Men in capes and pince-nez
shield them. Tassels dance at my hips.
In this newspaper lithograph
my buttocks are shown swollen
and luminous as a planet.
Monsieur Cuvier investigates
between my legs, poking, prodding,
sure of his hypothesis.
I half expect him to pull silk
scarves from inside me, paper poppies,
then a rabbit! He complains
at my scent and does not think
I comprehend, but I speak
English. I speak Dutch. I speak
a little French as well, and
languages Monsieur Cuvier
will never know have names.
Now I am bitter and now
I am sick. I eat brown bread,
drink rancid broth. I miss good sun,
miss Mother’s sadza. My stomach
is frequently queasy from mutton
chops, pale potatoes, blood sausage.
I was certain that this would be
better than farm life. I am
the family entrepreneur!
But there are hours in every day
to conjur my imaginary
daughters, in banana skirts
and ostrich-feather fans.
Since my own genitals are public
I have made other parts private.
In my silence I possess
mouth, larynx, brain, in a single
gesture. I rub my hair
with lanolin, and pose in profile
like a painted Nubian
archer, imagining gold leaf
woven through my hair, and diamonds.
Observe the wordless Odalisque.
I have not forgotten my Xhosa
clicks. My flexible tongue
and healthy mouth bewilder
this man with his rotting teeth.
If he were to let me rise up
from this table, I’d spirit
his knives and cut out his black heart,
seal it with science fluid inside
a bell jar, place it on a low
shelf in a white man’s museum
so the whole world could see
it was shriveled and hard,
geometric, deformed, unnatural.
~~~
'Twas mercy brought me from my Pagan land,Taught my benighted soul to understandThat there's a God, that there's a Saviour too:Once I redemption neither sought nor knew.Some view our sable race with scornful eye,"Their colour is a diabolic die."Remember, Christians, Negros, black as Cain,May be refin'd, and join th' angelic train.
~~~
                                                   Miles of them grow in my carry-on
and travel with me across continents
but the customs officers are suspicious
they eye my old suitcase and ask me to open it                                                   Pickles? they ask sniffing deeply
prodding a packet or two
say Sure ma’am you’ve got no jeera or chilies?
(now they’ve learned the Hindi word for cumin
so the new trick is to joke with us) And one time
                                                  I saw three burly officers question
an elderly couple disheveled
as I was from 20-plus hours
of travel from Kolkata
and as disoriented (and yes
as usual all the usual “foreign” suspects
are sent along to “Agriculture”) and
they poked around in their overstuffed bags
(where some rice fields appeared but
they couldn’t see them of course) and
                                                      one officer said Duck? Bombay Duck?
It’s a fish?? Dried fish your son
wanted? Sorry no fish allowed
or birds
~~~
for the eyes of the children,
the last to melt,
the last to vaporize,
for the lingering
eyes of the children, staring,
the eyes of the children of
buchenwald,
of viet nam and johannesburg,
for the eyes of the children
of nagasaki,
for the eyes of the children
of middle passage,
for cherokee eyes, ethiopian eyes,
russian eyes, american eyes,
for all that remains of the children,
their eyes,
staring at us, amazed to see
the extraordinary evil in
ordinary men.
~~~
Thung joo Kwa yaa na povi sah
Thung joo Kwa yaa na povi sah
       Tsay ohi taa geh wo gi wa naa povi sah
       pin povi
       pin povi do mu u da kun
       ka nee na nun dun naa da si tah.
On top of Black Mesa there are flowers
On top of Black Mesa there are flowers
       dew on yellow flowers
       mountain flowers I see
       so far away that it makes me cry.
She opened her eyes slowly,
       as if to awaken from a trance
           cast by a song,
           transporting her to childhood,
       Back to the flowers  
       growing atop Black Mesa,
       so far and yet
       clearly brilliant.
Awake from the song,
       Gia focused on her daughter,
       anxiously awaiting
       to be taught a new song.
The old woman chose to take her time,
       she had learned from experience,
       attention is better paid by children,
       when there is a little pause,
           and mystery
               in storytelling.
Soon enough Gia spoke . . .
        “When I was a young girl,
        my family would camp
        below Kwheng sa po,
        during the farming months.
        We spent most of our days
        following my grandmother
        through rows of corn
        and playing in the streams below.
        One day white men came in a wagon,
        telling us about a school for Indians,
        run by the government.
        We were told this school would educate
        and prepare us for jobs in the white man’s world.
        None of us knew what any of it meant,
        but these men spoke sweetly
        offering grandmother a roll of baling wire
        for each child that went to school.
        Before we knew what was happening,
        we were sitting in the back of their wagon,
        on our way to government school,
        away from our families,
        to another man’s world.
        Often we would cry,
        out of loneliness,
        but this song helped us
        to remember our home.”
Get thoughtfully straightened
the pleats on her skirt,
swallowing the last of her coffee.
Smiling, she continued . . .
        “The government school taught sewing,
        I learned on an electric machine.
        By the time I returned to the village I could
        sew, but few of the people had heard of sewing machines,
        or even electricity.
        The machine I learned to operate as my trade
        could not be carried here and there,
        but this song you are learning,
        will always be carried in your heart,  
        here and there.”
~~~
In my country our shamans were women
and our gods multiple until white people brought
an ecstasy of rosaries and our cities today
glow with crosses like graveyards. As a child
in Sunday school I was told I’d go to hell
if I didn’t believe in God. Our teacher was a woman
whose daughters wanted to be nuns and I askedWhat about babies and what about Buddha, and she saidThey’re in hell too and so I memorized prayers
and recited them in front of women
I did not believe in. Deliver us from evil.
O sweet Virgin Mary, amen
~~~
“I do not know English”
—from “I Do Not” by Michael Palmer

“Marunong akong mag-ingles” (I do know English)
—any 21st-century Filipino poet




I do know English.
I do know English for I have something to say about this latest peace stirring between a crack that’s split a sidewalk traversing a dusty border melting at noon beneath an impassive sun.
I do know English and, therefore, when hungry, can ask for more than minimum wage, pointing repeatedly at my mouth and yours.
Such a gesture can only mean what it means: I do not want to remain hungry and I am looking at your mouth.
I do know English and still will not ask permission.
I shall call you “Master” with a lack of irony; lift my cotton blouse; cup my breasts to offer them to your eyes, your lips, your tongue; keen at the moon hiding at 11 a.m. to surface left tendon on my neck. For your teeth. And so on.
No need to decipher your response—and if you wish, go ahead: spank me.
I do know English. Therefore I can explain this painting of a fractured grid as the persistent flux of our “selves” as time unfolds.
There is a way to speak of our past or hopes for the future, the hot-air balloon woven from a rainbow’s fragments now floating over St. Helena; your glasses I nearly broke when, afterwards, you flung me to the floor as violence is extreme and we demand the extreme from each other; your three moans in a San Francisco hallway after I fell to my knees; your silence in New York as I knocked on your door. There is a way to articulate your silence—a limousine running over a child on the streets of Manila and Shanghai. And Dubai.
There is a way to joke about full-haired actors running for President and the birth of a new American portrait: “Tight as a Florida election.”
I do know English and so cannot comprehend why you write me no letters even as you unfailingly read mine.
Those where I write of the existence of a parallel universe to create a haven when your silence persists in this world I was forced to inherit.
Which does not mean I cannot differentiate between a reflection and a shadow, a threnody and a hiccup, the untrimmed bougainvillea bush mimicking a fire and the lawn lit by a burning cross.
I can prove Love exists by measuring increased blood flow to the brain’s anterior cingulated cortex, the middle insula, the putamen and the caudate nucleus.
Nor is “putamen” a pasta unless I confirm to you that my weak eyesight misread “puttanesca” as the crimson moon began to rise, paling as it ascends for fate often exacts a price.
I can see an almond eye peer behind the fracture on a screen and know it is not you from the wafting scent of crushed encomiums.
I can remind you of the rose petals I mailed to you after releasing them from the padded cell between my thighs.
I slipped the petals inside a cream envelope embossed in gold with the seal of a midtown Manhattan hotel whose façade resembles a seven-layered wedding cake. Which we shall share only through the happiness of others. Which does not cancel Hope.
I can recite all of your poems as I memorized them through concept as well as sound.
I speak of a country disappearing and the impossibility of its replacement except within the tobacco-scented clench of your embrace.
I can tell you I am weary of games, though they continue. Manila’s streets are suffused with protesters clamoring for an adulterer’s impeachment. Their t-shirts are white to symbolize their demand for “purity.” Space contains all forms, which means it lack geometry. My lucid tongue has tasted the dust from monuments crumbling simply because seasons change.
Because I do know English, I have been variously called Miss Slanted Vagina, The Mail Order Bride, The One With The Shoe Fetish, The Squat Brunette Who Wears A Plaid Blazer Over A Polka-Dot Blouse, The Maid.
When I hear someone declare war while observing a yacht race in San Diego, I understand how “currency” becomes “debased.”
They have named it The Tension Between The Popular Vote And The Electoral College.
I do know English.
                
~~~
Little Box talks back
With a new set of teeth
And pink gums
A fake nose and a wax mustache
She disguises her voice
To sound like Groucho
 
 • 
Little Box opens up
And cries to her psychiatristI don’t know why they hate me
I’m such a sweetheart
I volunteer at the zoo
And teach Mandarin
To their bratty children
~~~
When i blow open green bottles
straight across hump of a frozen tongue
when i shove brown glass
through skull of a possum
and pass from my ears a baptism of red piss
when i cry from my butt like a jackal
and throw limbs of a dying mule into the river
when i spit venom from the head
burn codeine into a cosmetic paste
and grieve into a wax of dried bulls
when my mystical bunions jam eyes
into searching spit of a starving wolf
into cosmic lips like monkey genitals
And i receive my pickled turned skeleton of rusty chains
in the bodega
i receive a symbolic heart made of five middle fingers
in the bodega
i receive a teeth parade of yellow roses to leave the bodega
and cross the rio grande
onto the flatbead bones of a musty nighttrain
I say
to see me loosen jaws like a snake
to see me exhausted after a few strikes
to see me pay dirt to the ice hog
in my masai-pachuca-doo
squatting on a pillow of old zoot suits
squatting among the names and breeds
breaking down cheeks dotted
on this night train
and i say i dream of the 1943 riots
I say i dream in a hailstorm of riots
And i say riots dream into a mass of skins stooping
on flatbed bones of a funky nighttrain
And when i siphon sweat for fuel
from this patron saint of chronic diarrhea
When i turn this rubber face into a spotted puma
and take on the forceful winds of the prune pickers
When my laughter dominates the last seat
And i burn labor contracts into brown port caca
Then I approach in mother of pearl and human blood
in father of smoking and coughing throats
and in my jelly of coyote strings
who is to say what when i approach
I mean somewhere along the road in this cold cold chicken shit
somewhere along the road in this wasted body
​somewhere along the road eat stocks, bonds feathers
​somewhere along the road confiscate borders from wild dogs
​somewhere along the road shove them into the imperial valley
​somewhere along the road cry hard
and let this night train sink its
rundown rectum of electric chairs into heaven
and say fuck it
I see a way through the maroon glass of this milky way
I say i see a way through for the cradle of hulls
sticking through these indigo ankles
I see a way through
for these torn shoes stinking like dead cats
I see a way through for these blood-streaked legs
I say i see a way through
for these pus-riddled holes in their suction-cup lips
and when i pass through toothless combs coming from armpits
of the bodega
when i pass through bats on corkscrews coming
from the bodega
when i push my mortified flesh from this bodega
and walk with the mildew of an old zoot suit
walk tall in my mud-packed-masai-pachuca-doo
walk among the survivors from the musty nighttrains
fuck it
I say dreams are like riots
i say we dream in a hailstorm of riots
and I say riots dream into a mass of skins
coming from flatbed bones of the funky funky nighttrains
~~~
I'd search for Philippines in History class.
The index named one page, moved on to Pierce.The Making of America marched past
my enigmatic father's place of birth.
The week he died some man we didn't know
called up. This is his brother, one more shock,phoning for him. "He died three days ago."
The leaden black receiver did not talk.
My uncle never gave his name or town,
we never heard from him. Was it a dream?
The earpiece roar dissolved to crackling sounds,
a dial tone erased the Philippines.
And yet my world grows huge with maps, crisscrossed,
my History alive with all I've lost.
~~~
Metaphor     metaphor     my pestilential aesthetic      A tsunami powers through     my mother’s ruinsDelta     delta     moist loins of the republic      Succumb to the low-lying succubus     do!Flagpole     flagpole     my father’s polemics      A bouquet of     fuck-u-bastard flowersFist me     embrace me     with your phantom limbs      Slay me     with your slumlord     panegyricsFlip over     so I can see your pastoral mounts      Your sword     slightly parting     from the scabbardGirl skulls     piled like fresh-baked loaves      A foul wind     scours my mother’s cadaverOrnamental     Oriental     techno     impresarios      I am your parlor rug     your chamber baubleLove me     stone me     I am all yours      Pound     Pound     my father’s EzraFreedom     freedom     flageolet-tooting   girlsDancing     on the roof     of the maquiladoras
~~~
beverly be the only south side you don’t fit ineverybody in your neighborhood color of white henbrown bag tupperware lunch don’t fill youafter school cross the street, count quarters with white friendsyou love 25¢ zebra cakes mom would never let you eatyou learn to white lie through white teeth at white henoreos in your palm, perm in your haireveryone’s irish in beverly, you just missin’ the white skinpray they don’t notice your burnt toast, unwondered breadyou be the brownest egg ever born from the white henpantry in your chest where you stuff all the Black indistract from the syllables in your name with a white grinkeep your consonants crisp, coffee milked, hands visiblenever touch the holiday-painted windows of white henyou made that mistake, scratched your initials in the paintan unmarked crown victoria pulled up, full of white menthey grabbed your wrist & wouldn’t show you a badgethe manager clucked behind the counter, thick as a white henthey told your friends to run home, but called the principal on you& you learned Black sins cost much more than white ones
~~~
Beauty is my irreparable and today I became geometric.
A faux linear figure that distills a skip trace of First principles.
In a whiteout of Atlantic snow banging stars into the femoral
vein of Euclid while rows of lavender circuits, all porous,
surrounded me. I genuflected before the hospital parking
of my father’s jaundice, for I am a good daughter of the colony.
The colony which begot the immortal heart of the markets.
Resource nursed all young bucks of the florets, a liquidity
I should service or else receive a lesser dessert. With my smudge
cleanse at the ready I find myself dispensing with the usual
future haunt of stability; a survival signaling my relationship
to time, or I’m out of it, entirely. Chanting hell as hair veils
my face as if this is a Western. Come polygon and I circumvent
the disaster, do not disturb my circles. Holy I went, holy
all around my head, the holy I am went careening down
the back stairs of this low-rise rental. Striated by the pinnacle
light of this city that has my blood pooled purple at the center
of its gravity. You can scan the ground from overhead for death
pits. I read this on the internet when I was dehydrated, lonely,
and afraid. Office plants all broad-leafed repositories
for cognition’s patent heart. I’ve gone and been abominable.
A column extended from the top of my head into heaven.
At the edges of my system an Anishinabek or Indo-European
projection of words my nerves could translate into the crawl
space of animal magnetism. White pine verticals send us up
as a stomach pumped by filial love. Oh, inconsequent curb
of my street I refuse to kneel, this day like any other, a cousin
charged with trafficking. Still waiting to be ordained, I make
mask of our features that are retreating. Plush pockets of rust
about another falsehood of water, a creek that pleats. I’ve gone
and got a blister. That summer a black bear’s muzzle was coated
in shellac from the aerosol can she bit through on my mother’s
porch. A half-century after my grandmother’s mother said,
don’t ever shoot a black bear, they are my people. So I continue
to speak more than this mortuary sunrise where I am only just alive.
Boozhoo, today is over.
~~~
The thing inside the
thing inside the thing
inside Malinche,
mother, Cortés, father,casta, first mestizo,
loanword for admixture,
dark one, darker than
one and lighter than
the other, espaldera,
graft, hybrid, pardo, parda,
castiza
~~~
At the airport-security checkpoint on my way to visit my grandmother, I am asked to drink from my water bottle.                   This water bottle?                   That's right. Open it and drink from it.

/
At the airport-security checkpoint on my way to visit my grandmother, I am asked to take off my shoes.
                   Take off my shoes?
                   Yes. Both Please.
/ 
At the airport-security checkpoint on my way to visit my grandmother, I am asked if I have a fever.
                   A fever? Really?
                   Yes. Really.
/ 
 
My grandmother is in a nursing home. It's not bad. It doesn't smell like pee. It doesn't smell like anything. When I go to see her, as I walk through the hall past the common room and the nurses' station, old person after old person puts out his or her hand to me. Steven, one says. Ann, another calls. It's like being in a third-world country, but instead of food or money you are what is wanted, your company. In third-world coun­tries I have felt overwhelmingly American, calcium-rich, privileged, and white. Here, I feel young, lucky, and sad. Sad is one of those words that has given up its life for our country, it's been a martyr for the American dream, it's been neutralized, co-opted by our culture to suggest a tinge of discomfort that lasts the time it takes for this and then for that to happen, the time it takes to change a channel. But sadness is real because once it meant something real. It meant dignified, grave; it meant trustworthy; it meant exceptionally bad, deplor­able, shameful; it meant massive, weighty, forming a compact body; it meant falling heavily; and it meant of a color: dark. It meant dark in color, to darken. It meant me. I felt sad.

 
~~~
Night, and beneath star-blazoned summer skies 
 Behold the Spirit of the musky South, A creole with still-burning, languid eyes,
 Voluptuous limbs and incense-breathing mouth: 
     Swathed in spun gauze is she, From fibres of her own anana tree.Within these sumptuous woods she lies at ease, 
 By rich night-breezes, dewy cool, caressed: ’Twixt cypresses and slim palmetto trees,
 Like to the golden oriole’s hanging nest, 
     Her airy hammock swings,And through the dark her mocking-bird yet sings.How beautiful she is! A tulip-wreath
 Twines round her shadowy, free-floating hair: Young, weary, passionate, and sad as death,
 Dark visions haunt for her the vacant air,
     While noiselessly she liesWith lithe, lax, folded hands and heavy eyes.Full well knows she how wide and fair extend
 Her groves bright flowered, her tangled everglades, Majestic streams that indolently wend
 Through lush savanna or dense forest shades, 
     Where the brown buzzard fliesTo broad bayous ’neath hazy-golden skies.Hers is the savage splendor of the swamp,
 With pomp of scarlet and of purple bloom,Where blow warm, furtive breezes faint and damp,
 Strange insects whir, and stalking bitterns boom—
     Where from stale waters deadOft looms the great jawed alligator’s head.Her wealth, her beauty, and the blight on these,—
 Of all she is aware: luxuriant woods,Fresh, living, sunlit, in her dream she sees;
 And ever midst those verdant solitudes
     The soldier’s wooden cross,O’ergrown by creeping tendrils and rank moss.Was hers a dream of empire? was it sin?
 And is it well that all was borne in vain?She knows no more than one who slow doth win,
 After fierce fever, conscious life again,
     Too tired, too weak, too sad,By the new light to be or stirred or glad.From rich sea-islands fringing her green shore,
 From broad plantations where swart freemen bend Bronzed backs in willing labor, from her store
 Of golden fruit, from stream, from town, ascend
     Life-currents of pure health:Her aims shall be subserved with boundless wealth.Yet now how listless and how still she lies,
 Like some half-savage, dusky Indian queen,Rocked in her hammock ’neath her native skies, 
 With the pathetic, passive, broken mien
     Of one who, sorely proved,Great-souled, hath suffered much and much hath loved!But look! along the wide-branched, dewy glade 
 Glimmers the dawn: the light palmetto trees And cypresses reissue from the shade,
 And she hath wakened. Through clear air she sees 
     The pledge, the brightening ray,And leaps from dreams to hail the coming day.
~~~
a poem in twelve rounds



1.
My head so big
they had to pry
me out. I’m sorry
Bird (is what I call
my mother). Cassius
Marcellus Clay,
Muhammad Ali;
you can say
my name in any
language, any
continent: Ali.2.
Two photographs
of Emmett Till,
born my year,
on my birthday.
One, he’s smiling,
happy, and the other one
is after. His mother
did the bold thing,
kept the casket open,
made the thousands look upon
his bulging eyes,
his twisted neck,
her lynched black boy.
I couldn’t sleep
for thinking,
Emmett Till.
One day I went
Down to the train tracks,
found some iron
shoe-shine rests
and planted them
between the ties
and waited
for a train to come,
and watched the train
derail, and ran,
and after that
I slept at night.3.
I need to train
around people,
hear them talk,
talk back. I need
to hear the traffic,
see people in
the barbershop,
people getting
shoe shines, talking,
hear them talk,
talk back.4.
Bottom line: Olympic gold
can’t buy a black man
a Louisville hamburger
in nineteen-sixty.
Wasn’t even real gold.
I watched the river
drag the ribbon down,
red, white, and blue.   5.
Laying on the bed,
praying for a wife,
in walk Sonji Roi.
Pretty little shape.
Do you like
chop suey?
Can I wash your hair
underneath
that wig?
Lay on the bed,
Girl. Lie
with me.
Shake to the east,
to the north,
south, west—
but remember,
remember, I need
a Muslim wife. So
Quit using lipstick.
Quit your boogaloo.
Cover up your knees
like a Muslim
wife, religion,
religion, a Muslim
wife. Eleven
months with Sonji,
first woman I loved.6.
There’s not
too many days
that pass that I
don’t think
of how it started,
but I know
no Great White Hope
can beat
a true black champ.
Jerry Quarry
could have been
a movie star,
a millionaire,
a senator,
a president—
he only had
to do one thing,
is whip me,
but he can’t.7. Dressing-Room Visitor
He opened
up his shirt:
“KKK” cut
in his chest.
He dropped
his trousers:
latticed scars
where testicles
should be, His face
bewildered, frozen
in the Alabama woods
that night in 1966
when they left him
for dead, his testicles
in a Dixie cup.
You a warning,
they told him,
to smart-mouth,
sassy-acting niggers,
meaning niggers
still alive,
meaning any nigger,
meaning niggers
like me.8. Training
Unsweetened grapefruit juice
will melt my stomach down.
Don’t drive if you can walk,
don’t walk if you can run.
I add a mile each day
and run in eight-pound boots.
My knuckles sometimes burst
the glove. I let dead skin
build up, and then I peel it,
let it scar, so I don’t bleed
as much. My bones
absorb the shock.
I train in three-minute
spurts, like rounds: three
rounds big bag, three speed
bag, three jump rope, one-
minute breaks,
no more, no less.
Am I too old? Eat only
kosher meat. Eat cabbage,
carrots, beets, and watch
the weight come down:
two-thirty, two-twenty,
two-ten, two-oh-nine.9.
Will I go
like Kid Paret,
a fractured
skull, a ten-day
sleep, dreaming
alligators, pork
chops, saxophones,
slow grinds, funk,
fishbowls, lightbulbs,
bats, typewriters,
tuning forks, funk
clocks, red rubber
ball, what you see
in that lifetime
knockout minute
on the cusp?
You could be
let go,
you could be
snatched back.10. Rumble in the JungleAli boma ye,
Ali boma ye,
~~~
Homo sapiens is the only species
to suffer psychological exile.
        —E. O. Wilson
 



I returned to a stand of pines,
                            bone-thin phalanx
 
flanking the roadside, tangle
                            of understory—a dialectic of dark
 
and light—and magnolias blossoming
                            like afterthought: each flower
 
a surrender, white flags draped
                            among the branches. I returned
 
to land’s end, the swath of coast
                            clear cut and buried in sand:
 
mangrove, live oak, gulfweed
                            razed and replaced by thin palms—
 
palmettos—symbols of victory
                            or defiance, over and over
 
marking this vanquished land. I returned
                            to a field of cotton, hallowed ground—
 
as slave legend goes—each boll
                            holding the ghosts of generations:
 
those who measured their days
                            by the heft of sacks and lengths
 
of rows, whose sweat flecked the cotton plants
                            still sewn into our clothes.
 
I returned to a country battlefield
                            where colored troops fought and died—
 
Port Hudson where their bodies swelled
                            and blackened beneath the sun—unburied
 
until earth’s green sheet pulled over them,
                            unmarked by any headstones.
 
Where the roads, buildings, and monuments
                            are named to honor the Confederacy,
 
where that old flag still hangs, I return
                            to Mississippi, state that made a crime
 
of me—mulatto, half-breed—native
                            in my native land, this place they’ll bury me.
~~~
The courage to let go of the door, the handle.
The courage to shed the familiar walls whose very
stains and leaks are comfortable as the little moles
of the upper arm; stains that recall a feast,
a child’s naughtiness, a loud blattering storm
that slapped the roof hard, pouring through. 
The courage to abandon the graves dug into the hill,
the small bones of children and the brittle bones
of the old whose marrow hunger had stolen;
the courage to desert the tree planted and only
begun to bear; the riverside where promises were
shaped; the street where their empty pots were broken. 
The courage to leave the place whose language you learned
as early as your own, whose customs however dan-
gerous or demeaning, bind you like a halter
you have learned to pull inside, to move your load;
the land fertile with the blood spilled on it;
the roads mapped and annotated for survival. 
The courage to walk out of the pain that is known
into the pain that cannot be imagined,
mapless, walking into the wilderness, going
barefoot with a canteen into the desert;
stuffed in the stinking hold of a rotting ship
sailing off the map into dragons’ mouths, 
Cathay, India, Siberia, goldeneh medina
leaving bodies by the way like abandoned treasure.
So they walked out of Egypt. So they bribed their way
out of Russia under loads of straw; so they steamed
out of the bloody smoking charnelhouse of Europe
on overloaded freighters forbidden all ports— 
out of pain into death or freedom or a different
painful dignity, into squalor and politics.
We Jews are all born of wanderers, with shoes
under our pillows and a memory of blood that is ours
raining down. We honor only those Jews who changed
tonight, those who chose the desert over bondage, 
who walked into the strange and became strangers
and gave birth to children who could look down
on them standing on their shoulders for having
been slaves. We honor those who let go of every-
thing but freedom, who ran, who revolted, who fought,
who became other by saving themselves.
~~~
Moon marked and touched by sun   
my magic is unwritten
but when the sea turns back
it will leave my shape behind.   
I seek no favor
untouched by blood
unrelenting as the curse of love   
permanent as my errors
or my pride
I do not mix
love with pity
nor hate with scorn
and if you would know me
look into the entrails of Uranus   
where the restless oceans pound.
I do not dwell
within my birth nor my divinities   
who am ageless and half-grown   
and still seeking
my sisters
witches in Dahomey
wear me inside their coiled cloths   
as our mother did
mourning.
I have been woman
for a long time
beware my smile
I am treacherous with old magic   
and the noon's new fury
with all your wide futures   
promised
I am
woman
and not white.
~~~
My friend
they don't care
if you're an individualist
a leftist  a rightist
a shithead or a snake
They will try to exploit you
absorb you  confine you
disconnect you  isolate you
or kill you
And you will disappear into your own rage
into your own insanity
into your own poverty
into a word a phrase a slogan a cartoon
and then ashes
The ruling class will tell you that
there is no ruling class
as they organize their liberal supporters into
white supremacist lynch mobs
organize their children into
ku klux klan gangs
organize their police into
killer cops
organize their propaganda into
a device to ossify us with angel dust
preoccupy us with western symbols in
african hair styles
inoculate us with hate
institutionalize us with ignorance
hypnotize us with a monotonous sound designed
to make us evade reality and stomp our lives away
And we are programmed to self-destruct
to fragment
to get buried under covert intelligence operations of
unintelligent committees impulsed toward death
And there it is
The enemies polishing their penises between
oil wells at the pentagon
the bulldozers leaping into demolition dances
the old folks dying of starvation
the informers wearing out shoes looking for crumbs
the life blood of the earth almost dead in
the greedy mouth of imperialism
And my friend
they don't care
if you're an individualist
a leftist  a rightist
a shithead or a snake
They will spray you with
a virus of legionnaire's disease
fill your nostrils with
the swine flu of their arrogance
stuff your body into a tampon of
toxic shock syndrome
try to pump all the resources of the world
into their own veins
and fly off into the wild blue yonder to
pollute another planet
And if we don't fight
if we don't resist
if we don't organize and unify and
get the power to control our own lives
Then we will wear
the exaggerated look of captivity
the stylized look of submission
the bizarre look of suicide
the dehumanized look of fear
and the decomposed look of repression
forever and ever and ever
And there it is
~~~
When I see the two cops laughing 
after one of them gets shot
because this is TV and one says
while putting pressure on the wound,Haha, you're going to be fine,
and the other says, I know, haha!, 
as the ambulance arrives—
I know the men are white.
I think of a clip from the hours 
of amateur footage I've seen
when another man at an intersection
gets shot, falls, and bleeds from a hole
the viewer knows exists only by the way 
the dark red pools by the standing cop's feet,
gun now holstered, who
yells the audience back to the sidewalk.
I know which one is dying 
while black and which one stands by white. 
I think this morning about the student 
in my class who wrote a free write line 
on the video I played
that showed a man pouring water
on his own chest, "...the homoerotic 
scene against a white sky" with no other men 
present. Who gets to see and who followswhat script? I ask my students. 
Whose lines are these and by what hand
are they written?
 
~~~
Come home, our sons, young drivers,
tell us you’re safe, not detained again
by police for your dark color,
sprocketed hair and a crime
you didn’t commit.
Maybe your car’s the wrong make
or rusty in a neighborhood
where cars park in garages at night.
 
Once, when you saw a squad car
you remembered Officer Smiley
and his dog that did tricks
in read-aloud books at J.J. Hill School.
Now, as you reach for your license
with shaking hands, tension raises
the chance something will go wrong.
 
This poem is for you, sons,
and for everyone who is afraid—
citizens of police, police of citizens.
It’s for Philando Castile,
a black school lunch supervisor
in an inner city school
who memorized children’s names
and their food allergies.
And it’s for the policeman
who stopped a car with a damaged taillight.
After he used his gun, his voice broke
like a frightened child’s.
 
Come home, sons, to mothers like me,
alert at night waiting for car lights
to beam in front of our house,
for the car to belong to our sons,
and our sons
to still belong to the world.
~~~
To be born yellow into a household where the black man rules with his fists  and the white
wife  body   livid   with      devotion         hip enough to confuse  trouble
with   love    or   whatever   it  was, such the  lucky  one   to come up so
unamerican   ,   thankful  one   in whose imagination the  country danger is   so ambient 
and precise  of   source   it vanishes    and with each departure  more
affectionate    machines   panting   to run the dream between  hope    and  habit  
 
I wanted to say this more clearly         In what ways  did   watching  your black father beat your
white mother   empower   you   as a brown   baby   ?   in  a blue    way      is  there
anything   so  cruel   so    crude    as  to say   you felt   each   of your hands   in
their  puppet   throats   as they screamed   for
help   in   unison   but  only    one  was   hunted  for   room   within the invisible  listener   Only
one  could  pray  that      far   
 
I wanted to say this more clearly       trustless of a soul  who hadn’t   suffered  he
tore  hers  toward him
 And I arrived as a kind of vengeance, the many versions of war worn raw by their sex, come to
be as the treacherous peace of empty pacts    and broken  chessmen were scattered all over the
room  
 
              It’s like being the last person alive
 
~~~
To those fair isles where crimson sunsets burn, We send a backward glance to gaze on thee, Brave Toussaint! thou was surely born to be A hero; thy proud spirit could but spurn  Each outrage on the race. Couldst thou unlearn The lessons taught by instinct? Nay! and we Who share the zeal that would make all men free, Must e’en with pride unto thy life-work turn. Soul-dignity was thine and purest aim; And ah! how sad that thou wast left to mourn In chains ’neath alien skies. On him, shame! shame! That mighty conqueror who dared to claim The right to bind thee. Him we heap with scorn, And noble patriot! guard with love thy name.
~~~
If Heaven has into being deigned to callThy light, O Liberty! to shine on all;Bright intellectual Sun! why does thy rayTo earth distribute only partial day?Since no resisting cause from spirit flowsThy universal presence to oppose;No obstacles by Nature’s hand impressed,Thy subtle and ethereal beams arrest;Not swayed by matter is they course benign,Or more direct or more oblique to shine;Nor motion’s laws can speed thy active course;Nor strong repulsion’s powers obstruct thy force:Since there is no convexity in mind,Why are thy genial rays to parts confined?While the chill North with thy bright beam is blest,Why should fell darkness half the South invest?Was it decreed, fair Freedom! at thy birth,That thou should’st ne’er irradiate all the earth?While Britain basks in thy full blaze of light,Why lies sad Afric quenched in total night?
 Thee only, sober Goddess! I attest,In smiles chastised, and decent graces dressed;To thee alone, pure daughter of the skies,The hallowed incense of the Bard should rise:Not that mad Liberty, in whose wild praiseToo oft he trims his prostituted bays;Not that unlicensed monster of the crowd,Whose roar terrific bursts in peals so loud,Deafening the ear of Peace; fierce Faction’s tool,Of rash Sedition born, and mad Misrule;Whose stubborn mouth, rejecting Reason’s rein,No strength can govern, and no skill restrain;Whose magic cries the frantic vulgar drawTo spurn at Order, and to outrage Law;To tread on grave Authority and Power,And shake the work of ages in an hour:Convulsed her voice, and pestilent her breath,She raves of mercy, while she deals out death:Each blast is fate; she darts from either handRed conflagration o’er the astonished land;Clamouring for peace, she rends the air with noise,And, to reform a part, the whole destroys.Reviles oppression only to oppress,And, in the act of murder, breathes redress.Such have we seen on Freedom’s genuine coast,Bellowing for blessings which were never lost.‘Tis past, and Reason rules the lucid hour,And beauteous Order reassumes his power:Lord of the bright ascendant may he reign,Till perfect Peace eternal sway maintain!
 O, plaintive Southerne! whose impassioned page Can melt the soul to grief, or rouse to rage;Now, when congenial themes engage the Muse,She burns to emulate thy generous views;Her failing efforts mock her fond desires,She shares thy feelings, not partakes thy fires.Strange power of song! the strain that warms the heartSeems the same inspiration to impart;Touched by the extrinsic energy alone,We think the flame which melts us is our own;Deceived, for genius we mistake delight,Charmed as we read, we fancy we can write.
 Though not to me, sweet Bard, thy powers belong,The cause I plead shall sanctify my song.The Muse awakes no artificial fire,For Truth rejects what Fancy would inspire:Here Art would weave her gayest flowers in vain,The bright invention Nature would disdain.For no fictitious ills these numbers flow,But living anguish, and substantial woe;No individual griefs my bosom melt,For millions feel what Oroonoko felt:Fired by no single wrongs, the countless hostI mourn, by rapine dragg’d from Afric’s coast.Perish the illiberal thought which would debaseThe native genius of the sable race!Perish the proud philosophy, which soughtTo rob them of the powers of equal thought!What! does the immortal principle withinChange with the casual colour of a skin?Does matter govern spirit? or is mindDegraded by the form to which it’s joined?
 No: they have heads to think, and hearts to feel,And souls to act, with firm, though erring zeal;For they have keen affections, soft desires,Love strong as death, and active patriot fires:All the rude energy, the fervid flameOf high-souled passion, and ingenuous shame:Strong, but luxuriant virtues, boldly shootFrom the wild vigour of a savage root.
 Nor weak their sense of honour’s proud control,For pride is virtue in a Pagan soul;A sense of worth, a conscience of desert,A high, unbroken haughtiness of heart; That selfsame stuff which erst proud empires swayed,Of which the conquerors of the world were made.Capricious fate of men! that very prideIn Afric scourged, in Rome was deified.
 No Muse, O Qua-shi! shall thy deeds relate,No statue snatch thee from oblivious fate!For thou wast born where never gentle MuseOn Valour’s grave the flowers of Genius strews;And thou wast born where no recording pagePlucks the fair deed from Time’s devouring rage.Had fortune placed you on some happier coast,Where polished Pagans souls heroic boast,To thee, who sought’st a voluntary grave,The uninjured honours of thy name to save,Whose generous arm thy barbarous Master spared,Altars had smoked, and temples had been reared.
 Whene’er to Afric’s shores I turn my eyes,Horrors of deepest, deadliest guilt arise;I see, by more than Fancy’s mirror shown,The burning village, and the blazing town:See the dire victim torn from social life,See the sacred infant, hear the shrieking wife!She, wretch forlorn! is dragged by hostile hands,To distant tyrants sold, in distant lands:Transmitted miseries, and successive chains,The sole sad heritage her child obtains.E’en this last wretched boon their foes deny,To weep together, or together die.By felon hands, by one relentless stroke,See the fond links of Nature broke!The fibres twisting round a parent’s heart,Torn from their grasp, and bleeding as they part.                 
 Hold, murderers! hold! nor aggravate distress;Respect the passions you yourself possess:Ev’n you, of ruffian heart, and ruthless hand,Love your own offspring, love your native land;Ev’n you, with fond impatient feelings burn,Though free as air, though certain of return.Then, if to you, who voluntary roam,So dear the memory of your distant home,O think how absence the loved scene endearsTo him, whose food is groan, whose drink is tears;Think on the wretch whose aggravated painsTo exile misery adds, to misery chains.If warm your heart, to British feelings true,As dear his land to him as yours to you;And Liberty, in you a hallowed flame,Burns, unextinguished, in his breast the same.Then leave him holy Freedom’s cheering smile,The heaven-taught fondness for the parent soil;Revere affections mingled with our frame,In every nature, every clime the same;In all, these feelings equal sway maintain;In all, the love of home and freedom reign:And Tempe’s vale, and parched Angola’s sand,One equal fondness of their sons command.The unconquered savage laughs at pain and toil,Basking in Freedom’s beams which gild his native soil.
 Does thirst of empire, does desire of fame,               (For these are specious crimes) our rage inflame?No: sordid lust of gold their fate controls,The basest appetite of basest souls;Gold, better gained by what their ripening sky,Their fertile fields, their arts, and mines supply.             
 What wrongs, what injuries does Oppression pleadTo smooth the crime and sanctify the deed?What strange offence, what aggravated sin?They stand convicted — of a darker skin!Barbarians, hold! the opprobrious commerce spare,             Respect His sacred image which they bear.Though dark and savage, ignorant and blind,They claim the common privilege of kind;Let Malice strip them of each other plea,They still are men, and men should still be free.           Insulted Reason loathes the inverted trade —Loathes, as she views the human purchase made;The outraged Goddess, with abhorrent eyes,Sees Man the traffic, souls the merchandise!Man, whom fair Commerce taught with judging eye,And liberal hand, to barter or to buy,Indignant Nature blushes to behold,Degraded man himself, trucked, bartered, sold;Of every native privilege bereft,Yet cursed with every wounded feeling left.Hard lot! each brutal suffering to sustain,Yet keep the sense acute of human pain.Plead not, in reason’s palpable abuse,Their sense of feeling callous and obtuse,From heads to hearts lies Nature’s plain appeal,Though few can reason, all mankind can feel.Though wit may boast a livelier dread of shame,A loftier sense of wrong, refinement claim;Though polished manners may fresh wants invent,And nice distinctions nicer souls torment;Though these on finer spirits heavier fall,Yet natural evils are the same to all.Though wounds there are which reason’s force may heal,There needs no logic sure to make us feel.The nerve, howe’er untutored, can sustainA sharp, unutterable sense of pain;As exquisitely fashioned in a slave,As where unequal fate a sceptre gave.Sense is as keen where Gambia’s waters glide,As where proud Tiber rolls his classic tide.Though verse or rhetoric point the feeling line,They do not whet sensation, but define.Did ever wretch less feel the galling chain,When Zeno proved there was no ill in pain?In vain the sage to smooth its horror tries;Spartans and Helots see with different eyes;Their miseries philosophic quirks deride,Slaves groan in pangs disowned by Stoic pride.
 When the fierce Sun darts vertical his beams,And thirst and hunger mix their wild extremes;When the sharp iron wounds his inmost soul,And his strained eyes in burning anguish roll;Will the parched Negro own, ere he expire,No pain in hunger, and no heat in fire?
 For him, when agony his frame destroys,What hope of present fame or future joys?For that have heroes shortened Nature’s date;For this have martyrs gladly met their fate;              But him, forlorn, no hero’s pride sustains,No martyr’s blissful visions soothe his pains;Sullen, he mingles with his kindred dust,For he has learned to dread the Christian’s trust;To him what mercy can that God display,Whose servants murder, and whose sons betray?Savage! thy venial error I deplore,They are not Christians who infest thy shore.
 O thou sad spirit, whose preposterous yokeThe great deliver Death, at length, has broke!Released from misery, and escaped from care,Go, meet that mercy man denied thee here.In thy dark home, sure refuge of the oppressed,The wicked vex not, and the weary rest.And, if some notions, vague and undefined,Of future terrors have assailed thy mind;If such thy masters have presumed to teach,As terrors only they are prone to preach;(For should they paint eternal Mercy’s reign,Where were the oppressor’s rod, the captive’s chain?)               If then, thy troubled soul has learned to dreadThe dark unknown thy trembling footsteps tread;On Him, who made thee what thou art, depend;He, who withholds the means, accepts the end.Thy mental night they Saviour will not blame,He died for those who never heard his name.Not thine the reckoning dire of Light abused,Knowledge disgraced, and Liberty misused;On thee no awful judge incensed shall sitFor parts perverted, and dishonoured wit.Where ignorance will be found the surest plea,How many learned and wise shall envy thee!
 And thou, White Savage! whether lust of gold,Or lust of conquest rule thee uncontrolled!Hero, or robber! — by whatever nameThou plead thy impious claim to wealth or fame;Whether inferior mischief be thy boast,A tyrant trader rifling Congo’s coast:Or bolder carnage track thy crimson way,Kings dispossessed, and provinces thy prey;Whether thou pant to tame earth’s distant bound;All Cortez murdered, all Columbus found;O’er plundered realms to reign, detested Lord,Make millions wretched, and thyself abhorred: —Whether Cartouche in forests break the law,Or bolder Caesar keep the world in awe;In Reason’s eye, in Wisdom’s fair account,Your sum of glory boasts a like amount:The means may differ, but the end’s the same;Conquest is pillage with a nobler name.Who makes the sum of human blessings less,Or sinks the stock of general happiness,Though erring fame may grace, though false renown,His life may blazon or his memory crown,Yet the last audit shall reverse the cause,And God shall vindicate his broken laws.
 Had those adventurous spirits who exploreThrough ocean’s trackless wastes, the far-sought shore;Whether of wealth insatiate, or of power,Conquerors who waste, or ruffians who devour:Had these possessed, O Cook! thy gentle mind,Thy love of arts, thy love of human kind;Had these pursued thy mild and liberal plan,Discoverers had not been a curse to man.Then, blessed Philanthropy! thy social handsHad linked dissevered worlds in brothers’ bands;Careless, if colour, or if clime divide;Then, loved and loving, man had lived, and died.Then with pernicious skill we had not knownTo bring their vices back and leave our own.
 The purest wreaths which hang on glory’s shrine,For empires founded, peaceful Penn! are thine;No blood-stained laurels crowned thy virtuous toil,No slaughtered natives drenched thy fair-earned soil.Still thy meek spirit in thy flock survives,Consistent still, their doctrines rule their lives;Thy followers only have effaced the shameInscribed by slavery on the Christian name.
 Shall Britain, where the soul of Freedom reigns,Forge chains for others she herself disdains?Forbid it, Heaven! O let the nations knowThe liberty she tastes she will bestow;Not to herself the glorious gift confined,She spreads the blessing wide as human kind;And scorning narrow views of time and place,Bids all be free in earth’s extended space.
 What page of human annals can recordA deed so bright as human rights restored?O may that god-like deed, that shining page,Redeem our fame, and consecrate our age!And let this glory mark our favoured shore,To curb false freedom and the true restore!
 And see, the cherub Mercy from above,Descending softly, quits the spheres of love!On Britain’s isle she sheds her heavenly dew,And breathes her spirit o’er the enlightened few;From soul to soul the spreading influence steals,Till every breast the soft contagion feels.She speeds, exulting, to the burning shore,With the best message angel ever bore;Hark! ’tis the note which spoke a Saviour’s birth,Glory to God on high, and peace on earth!She vindicates the Power in Heaven adored,She stills the clank of chains, and sheathes the sword;She cheers the mourner, and with soothing handsFrom bursting hearts unbinds the oppressor’s bands;Restores the lustre of the Christian name,And clears the foulest blot that dimmed its fame.
 As the mild Spirit hovers o’er the coast,A fresher hue the withered landscapes boast;Her healing smiles the ruined scenes repair,And blasted Nature wears a joyous air;While she proclaims through all their spicy groves,‘Henceforth your fruits, your labours, and your loves,All that your Sire possessed, or you have sown,Sacred from plunder — all is now your own.’
 And now, her high commission from above,Stamped with the holy characters of love,The meek-eyed spirit waving in her hand,Breathes manumission o’er the rescued land:She tears the banner stained with blood and tears,And, Liberty! thy shining standard rears!As the bright ensign’s glory she displays,See pale Oppression faints beneath the blaze!The giant dies! no more his frown appals,The chain, untouched, drops off, the fetter falls.Astonished echo tells the vocal shore,Oppression’s fallen, and slavery is no more!               The dusky myriads crowd the sultry plain,And hail that mercy long invoked in vain.Victorious power! she bursts their two-fold bands,And Faith and Freedom spring from Britain’s hands.
 And Thou! great source of Nature and of Grace,Who of one blood didst form the human race,Look down in mercy in thy chosen time,With equal eye on Afric’s suffering clime:Disperse her shades of intellectual night,Repeat thy high behest — Let there be light!Bring each benighted soul, great God, to Thee,And with thy wide Salvation make them free!
~~~
 À La Mode, 1976, by Asco (photographer: Harry Gamboa, Jr.) 
I dare you to hear me
tell just which and what
sort of girl I was, always
had been, and why. You
may as well yes-yes me.
You’ll get no chance to
cut in. This is No Movie
and I’m the leading gal,
the femme fatale in cork
platform sandals, mis-
taking Woolworth’s
plastic earrings for
glam, mis-american,
which and what sort?
The kind who never
introduces the top six
buttons of  her dress
to their holes, whose
legs always cross
when she sits on a
table, who pats vanilla
pancake over her rich,
theatrical skin to lift
dark hair, dark eyes, dark
lips from the level
of   East Los Common
to revelation, and you’re
all in my made-up
fairy tale now, you &
these suave muchachos,
we’re all queasy in the
where is it 40s  50s  60s
70s brown beautiful
people pronouncing our perfect
English, accorded
zero-to-slivers of
silver screen glory.
I dare you, looking
in from the tangled
reel of the future,
say out loud what I’m
sitting on. Kitten-posed
on a table top in Philippe’s
Original Sandwich Shop,
Los Angeles, ’76, next
to the napkins and
sugar shaker, I’m not
afraid of the cleaning rag
wiping me out of the frame,
I take in the unedited
numbers that tumble
in one continuous shot
from my Now to yours,
and there’s a mestiza
born every minute, I
know where I sit:
right on top of a
pretty warm piece
of sweet American pie.
~~~
I don't usually talk to strangers, but it is four o'clock and I can't get a cab. I need a cab because I have packages, but it's four o'clock and all the cabs are off duty. They are making a shift change. At the bus stop I say, It's hard to get a cab now. The woman standing next to me glances over without turning her head. She faces the street where cab after cab drives by with its light off. She says, as if to anyone, It's hard to live now. I don't respond. Hers is an Operation Iraqi Freedom answer. The war is on and the Department of Homeland Security has decided we have an elevated national-threat level, a code-orange alert. I could say something, but my packages are getting heavier by the minute and besides, what is there to say since rhetorically it's not about our oil under their sand but about freeing Iraqis from Iraqis and Osama is Saddam and Saddam is “that man who tried to kill my father” and the weapons of mass destruction are, well, invisible and Afghanistan is Iraq and Iraq is Syria and we see ourselves only through our own eyes and the British, but not the French, and Germany won't and Turkey won't join us but the coalition is inside Baghdad where the future is the threat the Americans feel they can escape though there is no escaping the Americans because war, this war, is about peace: “The war in Iraq is really about peace. Trying to make the world more peaceful. This victory in Iraq, when it happens, will make the world more peaceful.”
 
~~~
Bubblegum lip gloss kissed,                Our lifelines, our mirrors,I was never a singkil princess            These are Luminous Mysteries — Knuckle cracking, polished toes,        Our notebooks, our language,I was never a Santacruzan queen      To witness, to make way,Black eyeliner, push up bra                  Our thirst and our wedding bands —I was never a curtsying debutante    To fill stone jars with water, to wed,Loud, gum-smacking babygirl             Our glamour and our armor.I was never a tiaraed Miss Fil Am     To transfigure, dazzling as the sun.
~~~
What?
You don’t feel at home in your country,
almost overnight?
All the simple things
you cared about,
maybe took for granted. . .
you feel
insulted, invisible?
Almost as if you’re not there?
But you’re there.
Where before you mingled freely. . .
appreciated people who weren’t
just like you. . .
divisions grow stronger.
That’s what “chosen” and “unchosen” will do.
(Just keep your eyes on your houses and gardens.
Keep your eyes on that tree in bloom.)
Yes, a wall. Ours came later but. . .
who talks about how sad the land looks,
marked by a massive wall?
That’s not a normal shadow.
It’s something else looming over your lives.
 
~~~
Dumbfounded in hospital whites, you are picture-book
itty-bit, floundering in bleach and steel. Braids untwirl
and corkscrew, you squirm, the crater in your shoulder
spews a soft voltage. On a TV screwed into the wall
above your head, neon rollicks. A wide-eyed train
engine perfectly smokes, warbles a song about forward.
 
Who shot you, baby?I don’t know. I was playing.
You didn’t see anyone?I was playing with my friend Sharon.I was on the swingand she was—
Are you sure you didn’t—No, I ain’t seen nobody but Sharon. I heardpeople yelling though, and—
 
Each bullet repainted you against the brick, kicked
you a little sideways, made you need air differently.
You leaked something that still goldens the boulevard.I ain’t seen nobody, I told you.
And at A. Lincoln Elementary on Washington Street,
or Jefferson Elementary on Madison Street, or Adams
Elementary just off the Eisenhower Expressway,
we gather the ingredients, if not the desire, for pathos:
 
an imploded homeroom, your empty seat pulsating
with drooped celebrity, the sometime counselor
underpaid and elsewhere, a harried teacher struggling
toward your full name. Anyway your grades weren’t
all that good. No need to coo or encircle anything,
no call for anyone to pull their official white fingers
through your raveled hair, no reason to introduce
the wild notion of loving you loud and regardless.
 
Oh, and they’ve finally located your mama, who
will soon burst in with her cut-rate cure of stammering
Jesus’ name. Beneath the bandages, your chest crawls
shut. Perky ol’ Thomas winks a bold-faced lie from
his clacking track, and your heart monitor hums
a wry tune no one will admit they’ve already heard.
 
Elsewhere, 23 seconds rumble again and again through
Sharon’s body. Boom, boom, she says to no one.
~~~
The number of bodies i have
is equal to the number of
gurney transfers that are
televised.
 
If we’re all “just human”  
then who is responsible?
 
A fire station drying out
from addiction. outside
the drizzling of firepower,
lowballing suns
 
it’s like a sauna in here.
the strain of a charred
bladder. bottled water
bad wiring,
 
that spark is no good
come sit with me for a
minute. my feet full of
diluted axe fluid
 
thought I heard you say
everything is medicine
but that’s just hearin
what you wanna hear
 
~~~
I said cake
I said top hat
I said microphone
four little golden baby heads
wait I said pirate ghost
wait wait I said closed eye smiling cat
he scrawled back oh my god
I thought fuck yeah I can read this at the marathon
he said Eileen smilesehhh I can use it
the bell of my computer rang
same message
wait the cat is crying with relief
the cat is a devil now
the cat is not mad
the cat making racialized jazz
uh or not my white hands
I’m talking to everyone now.
and I’m using a filter. No I’m not
I acknowledge that there is an
image of me twice. I only recently
learned the term jazz hands
if we fucked Pennsylvania up what is our
hope to live in a stolen country that was always stolen
and worked largely by stolen people. Out of a conservative
diaspora came I mongrel poet from Massachusetts
to make my marklove & these things and opportunities
to speak. We can’t fall down we teem in the new opportunity
we discover what resistance means
our time & blowing up the inside of my computer
buck studies
the phone says delivered
what is.
Adam says did you see my beard.
We talk about money awhile
I ride my bike. Get off the phone goes
ding. It’s his beard calling. I go oh.
you have what I want.
he says lol
then skull
then rocket
then turkey
green pistol
and a flame. I
don’t know what to say back to that
I say bike and go.
~~~
                                          —for Dennis Brutus



This year the leaves turn red green black
freedom colors each leaf
each stitch of grass. I am amazed
at my sweet harvest. The prison door has opened
and a nation’s heart is released. I am full
having spent my greediness in a ritual of joy.
~~~
Miss Scarlett, effen we kain git de doctahw’en Miss Melly’s time come, doan you bodderAh kin manage. Ah knows all ’bout birthin.Ain’ mah ma a midwife? Ain’ she raise meter be a midwife, too? Jes’ you leave itter me. She warn’t dar. Well’m, Dey Cookie say Miss Meade done got wud early dis mawnin’dat young Mist’ Phil done been shot an’ Miss Meadeshe tuck de cah’ige an’ Ole Talbot an’Besty an’ dey done gone ter fotch him home.Cookie say he bad hurt an’ Miss Meade ain’gwin ter be studyin’ ’bout comin’ uphyah. Dey ain’ dar, Miss Scarlett. Ah drapped inter pass time of de day wid Mammy onmah way home.Dey’s doen gone. House all locked up.Spec dey’s at de horsepittle.Miss Elsing ober at de horsepittle.Dey Cookie ’lows a whole lot of woundedsojers come in on de early train. Cookie fixin’soup ter tek over dar. She say—Yas’mGawdlmighty, Miss Scarlett! De Yankees ain’ at Tara, s dey? Gawdlmighty, Miss Scarlett! Whut’ll dey do ter Maw?Dey’s fightin’ at Jonesboro, Miss Scarlett!Dey say our gempumus is gittin’ beat.Oh, Gawd, Miss Scarlett! Whut’ll happen terMaw an’ Poke? Oh, Gawd, Miss Scarlett! Whut’ll happenter us effen de Yankees gits hyah? Oh, Gawd—Ah ain’ nebber seed him, Miss Scarlett.No’m, he ain’ at de horsepittle.Miss Merriwetheran’ Miss Elsing ain’ dar needer.A man he tole me de doctah down     by de car shed     wid the woundedsojers jes’ come in frum Jonesboro, butMiss Scarlett, Ah wuz sceered ter go down dar terde shed—dey’s folkses dyin’ down dar. Ah’ssceered of daid folkses—Miss Scarlett, fo’ Gawd, Ahcouldn’ sceercely git one of dem ter readyo’ note. Dey wukin’ in de horsepittlelak dey all done gone crazy. One doctahhe say ter me, “Damn yo’ hide! Doan you comeroun’ hyah bodderi’ me ’bout babies w’enwe got a mess of men dyin’ hyah. Git some woman ter he’p you.” An’ den Ah went aroun’ an’ about an’ ask fer newslak you done tole me an’ dey all say “fightin’at Jonesboro” an’ Ah—Is her time nigh, Miss Scarlett?Is de doctah come?Gawd, Miss Scarlett! Miss Melly bad off!Fo’ Gawd, Miss Scarlett—Fo’ Gawd, Miss Scarlett!We’s got ter have a doctah. Ah—Ah—Miss Scarlett, Ah doan know nutin’ ‘bout bringin’ babies.
~~~
I scratch earth around timpsila 
on this hill, while below me,
hanging in still air, a hawk
searches the creekbed for my brothers.
Squat leaves, I’ll braid your roots
into such long ropes, they’ll cover
the rump of my stallion.
Withered flower, feed us now
buffalo rot in the waist-high grass.
Hear my sisters laugh?
They dream of feasts, of warriors
to owl dance with them
when this war is over. They don’t see
our children eating treebark, cornstalks,
these roots. Their eyes gleam
in shallow cheeks. The wagon people
do not think relationship is wealth.
Sisters, last night the wind
returned my prayer, allowing me to hear
Dog Soldiers singing at Ash Hollow.
I threw away my blanket
stained with lies.
Above the wings of my tipi,
I heard the old woman in Maka Sica
sigh for us. Then I knew
the distance of High Back Bone’s death-
fire from another world away. Even they
may never stop its motion.
Yesterday at noon, I heard
my Cheyenne sister moan as she waded
through deep snow before soldiers
cut up her corpse to sell
as souvenirs. Are my brothers
here? Ghosts bring all my joy.
I walk this good road between rock
and sky. They dare not threaten with death
one already dead.
~~~
A Rock, A River, A Tree
Hosts to species long since departed,   
Marked the mastodon,
The dinosaur, who left dried tokens   
Of their sojourn here
On our planet floor,
Any broad alarm of their hastening doom   
Is lost in the gloom of dust and ages.
But today, the Rock cries out to us, clearly, forcefully,   
Come, you may stand upon my
Back and face your distant destiny,
But seek no haven in my shadow,
I will give you no hiding place down here.
You, created only a little lower than
The angels, have crouched too long in   
The bruising darkness
Have lain too long
Facedown in ignorance,
Your mouths spilling words
Armed for slaughter.
The Rock cries out to us today,   
You may stand upon me,   
But do not hide your face.
[...]
~~~
She came home running
       back to the mothering blackness   
       deep in the smothering blackness
white tears icicle gold plains of her face   
       She came home running
She came down creeping
       here to the black arms waiting
       now to the warm heart waiting
rime of alien dreams befrosts her rich brown face   
       She came down creeping
She came home blameless
       black yet as Hagar’s daughter
       tall as was Sheba’s daughter
threats of northern winds die on the desert’s face   
       She came home blameless
~~~
I.
    The first question is always phrased this way:
    “So. How much Indian are you?”
 
II.
    We did not live in tepees.
    We did not braid our hair.
    We did not fringe our shirts.
    We did not wear war bonnets.
    We did not chase the buffalo.
    We did not carry shields.
    We were never Plains Indians.
    We tried to ride,
    but we kept falling off of our dogs.
 
III.
     A local official came to our office to ask our help with a city event. He had a splendid idea, he said. To kick off the event and show everyone in town that our tribe was still around, we should go up to the bluff overlooking the city and make a big smoke signal. Then they would know we were here.
     Who ever heard of smoke signals in the forests? I imagined us upon the bluff, lighting one of those firestarter bricks. We haven’t made fire since the Boy Scouts took over. And how would the citizens know it was us? They’d probably call the fire department.
 
IV.
     As they ask, they think, yes,     I can see it in her face. High cheekbones
    (whatever those are) and dark hair. 
 
    Here’s a thought: don’t we all have
    high cheekbones? If we didn’t,
    our faces would cave in.
   (But I do have a colonized nose.)
 
    I’m sick of explaining myself.
 
    “You know,” I finally say,
    “It doesn’t matter to my people.”
    I ride off to my ranch-style home.
    Time to weave a basket, or something.
 
~~~
                                             woven plaque basket with sunflower design, Hopi,                                              Arizona, before 1935                                             from an American Indian basketry exhibit in                                             Portsmouth, Virginia
The Arizona highway sailed across the desert—
     a gray battleship drawing a black wake,
            halting at the foot of the orange mesa,
                  unwilling to go around.
Hopi men and women—brown, and small, and claylike
      —peered down from their tabletops at yellow tractors, water trucks,
            and white men blistered with sun—red as fire ants—towing
                  sunscreen-slathered wives in glinting Airstream trailers
                         in caravans behind them.
Elders knew these bia roads were bad medicine—knew too
     that young men listen less and less, and these young Hopi men
           needed work, hence set aside their tools, blocks of cottonwood root
                 and half-finished Koshari the clown katsinas, then
                        signed on with the Department of Transportation,
were hired to stab drills deep into the earth’s thick red flesh
     on First Mesa, drive giant sparking blades across the mesas’ faces,
           run the drill bits so deep they smoked, bearding all the Hopi men
                 in white—Bad spirits, said the Elders—
The blades caught fire, burned out—Ma’saw is angry, the Elders said.
     New blades were flown in by helicopter. While Elders dreamed
            their arms and legs had been cleaved off and their torsos were flung
                  over the edge of a dinner table, the young Hopi men went
                         back to work cutting the land into large chunks of rust.
Nobody noticed at first—not the white workers,
     not the Indian workers—but in the mounds of dismantled mesa,
           among the clods and piles of sand,
                 lay the small gray bowls of babies’ skulls.
Not until they climbed to the bottom did they see
     the silvered bones glinting from the freshly sliced dirt-and-rock wall—
           a mausoleum mosaic, a sick tapestry: the tiny remains
                 roused from death’s dusty cradle, cut in half, cracked,
                        wrapped in time-tattered scraps of blankets.Let’s call it a day, the white foreman said.
     That night, all the Indian workers got sad-drunk—got sick
          —while Elders sank to their kivas in prayer. Next morning,
                as dawn festered on the horizon, state workers scaled the mesas,
                        knocked at the doors of pueblos that had them, hollered
                               into those without them,
demanding the Hopi men come back to work—then begging them—
     then buying them whiskey—begging again—finally sending their white
          wives up the dangerous trail etched into the steep sides
                to buy baskets from Hopi wives and grandmothers
                       as a sign of treaty.
When that didn’t work, the state workers called the Indians lazy,
      sent their sunhat-wearing wives back up to buy more baskets—
           katsinas too—then called the Hopis good-for-nothings, 
                 before begging them back once more.We’ll try again in the morning, the foreman said.
     But the Indian workers never returned—
          The bias and dots calls to work went unanswered,
                as the fevered Hopis stayed huddled inside.
The small bones half-buried in the crevices of mesa—
     in the once-holy darkness of silent earth and always-night—
          smiled or sighed beneath the moonlight, while white women
                in Airstream trailers wrote letters home
praising their husbands’ patience, describing the lazy savages:
     such squalor in their stone and plaster homes—cobs of corn stacked
         floor to ceiling against crumbling walls—their devilish ceremonies
               and the barbaric way they buried their babies,
                      oh, and those beautiful, beautiful baskets.
~~~
Here’s what I had in mind, kōtiro, this
clipping at words like overgrown maikuku — 
return the blankets of domestic life; don’t fold
washing or wear shoes, polish these rerenga kē.
Eh. But this world.
I s’pose neither of us planned to be in politics,
never did do what others told us to — 
wahanui though, go on, get
your sedition on girl,
your agitator, your defiant speak
to each other eye to eye — 
Māori been jailed for nouns, phrases;
butcher up a clause, get buried
in Pākehā kupu, then dig that
out like the old people. No one approved
of their language either.
 
~~~
Oh, woman, woman in thy brightest hour Of conscious worth, of pride, of conscious power Oh, nobly dare to act a Christian’s part, That well befits a lovely woman’s heart! Dare to be good, as thou canst dare be great; Despise the taunts of envy, scorn and hate; Our ‘skins may differ,’ but from thee we claim A sister’s privilege, in a sister’s name. We are thy sisters, Oh, woman, woman in thy brightest hour Of conscious worth, of pride, of conscious power Oh, nobly dare to act a Christian’s part, That well befits a lovely woman’s heart! Ddare to be good, as thou canst dare be great; Despise the taunts of envy, scorn and hate; Our ‘skins may differ,’ but from thee we claim A sister’s privilege, in a sister’s name. We are thy sisters, – God has truly said, That of one blood, the nations he has made. Oh, christian woman, in a christian land, Canst thou unblushing read this great command? Suffer the wrongs which wring our inmost heart To draw one throb of pity on thy part; Our ‘skins may differ,’ but from thee we claim A sister’s privilege, in a sister’s name. Oh, woman! – though upon thy fairer brow The hues of roses and of lilies grow—   These soon must wither in their kindred earth, From whence the fair and dark have equal birth. Let a bright halo o’er thy virtues shed A lustre, that shall live when thou art dead; Let coming ages learn to bless they name Upon the altar of immortal fame. 
~~~
ninety-nine names for my god
though i know none for my [     ]
a failing not of my deity but of
my arabic      not the language
itself rather the overeager mosaic
i hoard      i steal       i borrow
from pop songs          & mine
from childhood fluency    i guard
my few swearwords like tinkling
silver anklets     spare & precious
& never nearly enough to muster
a proper arabic anger      proper arabic
vulgarity     only a passing spar
always using the names of animals
i am not polite         i am only inarticulate
overproud      of my little arsenal
a stranger blows a wet tobacco kiss
through the window    of my taxi
& i deploy     my meager weapons
[dog]          [pig]         [donkey]
& finally        my crown jewel
i pass my tongue across my teeth
crane my neck about the window
& call        [your mother’s                  ]
~~~
So by sixteen we move in packs
learn to strut and slide
in deliberate lowdown rhythm
talk in a syn/co/pa/ted beat
because we want so bad
to be cool, never to be mistaken
for white, even when we leave
these rowdier L.A. streets—
remember how we paint our eyes
like gangsters
flash our legs in nylons
sassy black high heels
or two inch zippered boots
stack them by the door at night
next to Daddy’s muddy gardening shoes.
~~~
Tell me how you entered this poem, how you even got in
here. Where my parentals come from is where I’m coming from
and where where I’m coming from is from we lock the front door
and the back and the side and can’t spare a single extra key. Wherewhere I’m coming from is from we shut all the windows tight like
our eyes to an ugly view: a jail if I ever saw one, and maybe I did,
and maybe that was enough for me. Maybe you made the mistake,
by coming here. Unannounced. Uninvited. It takes a lot of talent
to step in someone’s crib and be welcomed without any alarms
going off, so shake your ass something dangerous if you can,
sing me a song real sexy-like or be suck out of luck if I feel
like shooting strangers today. If home is where the heart is
then four red bullet wounds across the chest of the city’s flag
say everything there is about my feelings toward you and
the whole damn world right now. Because it was my own
blood this time and yet I’m still here, and the funny thing
about that town and this one is that they both burned down
once. And down the hall they’re burning bud and I want some
kinda sorta but without the friends. Which makes you foe,
I suppose, as if you are the presence of all colors and I am
the absence of said colors. But maybe I got it backwards,
twisted it all up. It just hurts to have my hair pulled even if
it’s by my own hand. My mind is spinning blanks inside every
chamber; everywhere I turn on the TV they’re shooting boys
like what I used to be before I wasn’t anymore and when did that
happen? And what am I now? Are you the phantom or me, me
or none of the above? The last shadow I cast on a sunny Sunday
stole my wallet and bought this gun and all the rounds and all
the rounds at the bar, too. Where I’m coming from, when in love:
squeeze. When lonely, loan yourself some time and don’t pay it
back. Beware, because I’m both lonely and in love like the living
embodiment of the code switch. I’m polluted air and poisoned water
and whatever else they say except when I say I’m not and I’m not
one to play for a fool for the record. Fear me. I’m godly and I’m just
and just get the hell out demon and do come again. Come again:
it’s my igneous ire toward you that keeps me a live wire, and alive.
~~~
if your complexion is a mess
our elixir spells skin success
you’ll have appeal bewitch be adored
hechizando con crema dermoblanqueadora
what we sell is enlightenment
nothing less than beauty itself
since when can be seen in the dark
what shines hidden in dirt
double dutch darky
take kisses back to Africa
they dipped you in a vat
at the wacky chocolate factory
color we’ve got in spades
melanin gives perpetual shade
though rhythm’s no answer to cancer
pancakes pale and butter can get rancid
~~~
—for Melissa L. Whiteman



“Hi, guy,” said I to a robin
perched on a pole in the middle
of the garden. Pink and yellow
firecracker zinnias, rough green
leaves of broccoli,
and deep red tomatoes on dying stems
frame his still presence.
“I’ve heard you’re not
THE REAL ROBIN. Bird watchers have
agreed,” I said. “THE REAL ROBIN
lives in England. They claim
your are misnamed and that we ought
to call you ‘a red-breasted thrush’
because you are
indigenous.”
He fluffed up. “Am I notJis ko ko?” he cried, “that persistent
warrior who carries warmth
northward every spring?”
He seemed so young, his red belly
a bit light and his wings, still
faded brown. He watched me
untangling the hose to water squash.
“Look who’s talking!” he chirruped.
“Your people didn’t come
from Europe or even India.
The turtles say you’re a relative
to red clay on this great island.”
Drops of crystal water
sparkled on the squash.
“Indigenous!” he teased
as he flew by.
~~~
I.
 
Black swollen fruit dangling on a limb
Red forgotten flesh sprayed across the prairie
Parched brown vines creeping over the wall
Yellow winged pollen, invisible enemies
 
Boluses without homesteads, grubs without a voice
Burrowed deeply into this land’s dark, dark heart
Someday, our pods and pupae shall turn in the earth
And burgeon into our motherlode’s bold beauty
 
 
II.
 
We’re a seed on the manure, on the sole of your shoe
We’re the louse trapped in your hank of golden hair
We’re the sliver that haunts beneath your thumbnail
We the church mouse you scorched with a match but lived
 
We’re the package wrapped, return address unknown
We’re the arm lowered again, again, a bloodied reverie
We’ve arrived shoeless, crutchless, tousle-haired, swollen-bellied
We shall inherit this earth’s meek glory, as foretold
 
 
II. (For Leah, my niece)
 
They gave you a title, but you were too proud to wear it
They gave you the paterland, but you were too lazy to farm it
 
Your condo is leaking, but you’re too angry to repair it
Your dress has moth holes, but you’re too sentimental to toss it
 
You’re too bored to play the lute, it hangs on the wall like an ornament
The piano bites you, it’s an eight-legged unfaithful dog
 
Love grows in the garden, but you’re too impudent to tend it
A nice Hakka boy from Ogden, so hardworking, so kind
 
The prayer mat is for prayer, not for catamite nipple-piercing
The Goddess wags her finger at your beautiful wasteland
 
A dream deferred, well, is a dream deferred
 
 
IV. (Janie’s retort, on her fortieth birthday)
 
The same stars come around and around and around
The same sun pecks her heat at the horizon
The same housing tract, the same shopping center
The same blunt haircut: Chinese, Parisian, Babylonion
The same lipstick: red and it comes off on your coffeecup
The same stars come around and around and around
The same sun tarries in the late noon sky
The same word for mom: Ah ma, madre, mere, majka
The same birthbabe: bald, purplish, you slap to make cry
The same stench: mother’s milk, shit and vomit
The same argument between a man and a woman
The same dog, hit by a car, the same escaped canary
The same turkey for Thanksgiving, Christmas and the New Year
The same three-tiered freeway: Istanbul, Tokyo, San Diego
The same hill, the same shanty town, the same lean-to
The same skyscraper: Hong Kong, Singapore, Toledo
The same soup: chicken, though the veggies may vary
The same rice for supper: white, brown or wild
The same stars come around and around and around
The same sun dips her head into the ocean
The same tree in the same poem by the same poet
The same old husband: saggy breasts, baggy thighs
The same blackness whether we sleep or die
 
 
V.
Whoever abandoned her grandmother at the bus stop
Whoever ran in and out the door like a blind wind
   spinning the upside-down prosperity sign right side up again
Whoever lost her virtue    in darkly paneled rooms    with white boys
Whoever prayed for round eyes
   and taped her eyelids in waiting
Whoever wore platform shoes
   blustering taller than her own kind
Whoever sold her yellow gold for Jehovah
Whoever discarded her jade Buddha for Christ
 
 
VI.
Why are you proud, father, entombed with the other woman?
Why are you proud, mother, knitting my shroud in heaven?
Why are you proud, fish, you feed the greedy mourners?
Why are you proud, peonies, your heads are bowed and weighty?
Why are you proud, millennium, the dialect will die with you?
Why are you proud, psalm, hammering yourself into light?
~~~
Because my father said Yesbut not in our lifetimes Because
my mother said I know my daughter
would never want to marry.
~~~
especially the rarest kind / or the kind named Priscilla G & not drowning

in bleach cream / creamy spin / but spinning blades on a black Nina

gunship in the gargantuan ghetto / not killing & maiming my brothers & potential

husbands / when the working mothers give up & when they do not

& when boys in their mad survivalist tactics

want a movie sex parade / silk-edging their sweaty fists in 30 watt lit basements

just because / death switch of a future /

none of that has to do with any kind of blackness or a crazed horizon

in the plumed summers of Los Angeles wherein television reenactments of real

fathers didn't occur enough for news sidebars / but more than generally believed /

they showed up to dailiness / cash in hand but as the school year revved up

the rest of the madness had nowhere to hide / ballooned horizon /

chemical concerns / fire up the blue turbines / fire up

unconscious intention plus the acne of ignorance / on the city's glittery filth façade

but not because of blackness / not for me /

when I would get home sometimes there might be food

sometimes just blackness I could live on / which I love
~~~
With statements by President Donald Trump



I write my body, as border betweenWe have some bad hombres here
this rock & the absence of water.& we’re going to get them out.
I cut myself with a scimitar,When Mexico sends its people,
as political documentation.they’re not sending their best.
How do you write about the violenceThey’re not sending you.
of every man you’ve ever loved?They’re sending people
Macho, youthat have lots of problems
breathe bright in the neocolony,& they’re bringing those problems to us
a problem of Empire pullingThey’re bringing drugs. They’re bringing
the capitalist threads of my border.crime. They’re rapists.
Empire: you were so sterileMexico’s court system [is]corrupt.
& shiny with your dead man’s coinsI want nothing to do with Mexico
& castration, your white rosesother than to build an impenetrable
& that trash bag full of a MexicanWALL & stop them from ripping
woman’s dark hair. Empire: youoff U.S. I love the Mexican people,
made us hungry for the glintbut Mexico is not our friend.
of machismo, the dim glareThey’re killing us at the border
of marianismo. Tonight on TV,& they’re killing us on jobs & trade.
muted montages of the largestFIGHT! Happy #CincodeMayo!
ICE raid in Texas. I drinkThe best taco bowls are made
pink champagne in a hotel bar,in Trump Tower Grill. I love Hispanics!
& correct the pronunciation of   my name.
~~~
It was like soul-kissing, the way the words
filled my mouth as Mrs. Purdy read from her desk.
All the other kids zoned an hour ahead to 3:15,
but Mrs. Purdy and I wandered lonely as clouds borne
by a breeze off Mount Parnassus. She must have seen
the darkest eyes in the room brim: The next day
she gave me a poem she’d chosen especially for me
to read to the all except for me white class.
She smiled when she told me to read it, smiled harder,
said oh yes I could. She smiled harder and harder
until I stood and opened my mouth to banjo playing
darkies, pickaninnies, disses and dats. When I finished
my classmates stared at the floor. We walked silent
to the buses, awed by the power of words.
~~~
‘How can the red men be forgotten, while so many of our states and territories, bays, lakes, and rivers, are indelibly stamped by names of their giving?’



Ye say they all have passed away,    That noble race and brave, That their light canoes have vanished    From off the crested wave; That ’mid the forests where they roamed    There rings no hunter shout, But their name is on your waters,    Ye may not wash it out. ’Tis where Ontario’s billow    Like Ocean’s surge is curled, Where strong Niagara’s thunders wake    The echo of the world. Where red Missouri bringeth    Rich tribute from the west, And Rappahannock sweetly sleeps    On green Virginia’s breast. Ye say their cone-like cabins,    That clustered o’er the vale, Have fled away like withered leaves    Before the autumn gale, But their memory liveth on your hills,    Their baptism on your shore, Your everlasting rivers speak    Their dialect of yore. Old Massachusetts wears it,    Within her lordly crown, And broad Ohio bears it,    Amid his young renown; Connecticut hath wreathed it    Where her quiet foliage waves, And bold Kentucky breathed it hoarse    Through all her ancient caves. Wachuset hides its lingering voice    Within his rocky heart, And Alleghany graves its tone    Throughout his lofty chart; Monadnock on his forehead hoar    Doth seal the sacred trust, Your mountains build their monument,    Though ye destroy their dust. Ye call these red-browned brethren    The insects of an hour, Crushed like the noteless worm amid    The regions of their power; Ye drive them from their father’s lands,    Ye break of faith the seal, But can ye from the court of Heaven     Exclude their last appeal? Ye see their unresisting tribes,    With toilsome step and slow, On through the trackless desert pass    A caravan of woe; Think ye the Eternal’s ear is deaf?    His sleepless vision dim? Think ye the soul’s blood may not cry    From that far land to him?
~~~
After Martin Luther King Jr.



The day they killed Martin
we could not return to New York City
our visiting senior class stuck in Huntsville
streets blazed with suffering in that small
Alabama town
in the dull shroud of morning
the whole world went crazy
devouring whatever light
that lit our half-cracked windows.
~~~
If I die, you say you will let your hair
turn silver, grow long, and you will go
into the dark place, for you’ve already begun
to forget what Mecca means.
Where we come from, you and I,maqam means home, means music; the Qur’an
can only be read as a song; a sheikh recites the Fatiha
as if he has built a house among the lines, the ayas.
We’ve both called our daughters Aya, and when they ask
about their name, we play holy verses for them, listen
to how the sheikh lingers long enough on each letter,
how the audience claps and whistles — Is it Umm Kulthum?
our daughters ask. He knows all his maqamat,
this sheikh, says God is greater, and Allah, Allah,
reply the faithful and the unfaithful alike,
for the earth is such a small planet, and look,
there is Ithaca, almost always on the horizon — 
float, my friend. Ithaca — It is rough, but raises goodmen, says Homer, but oh, the women, the women
know how to house the bodies of the drowned. They sing,In the Name of the Cross, of God, the Merciful. A child
in Syria has amputated legs because he has ventured
into a minefield to eat grass. He still has two eyes,
two arms, a mouth. God is greater, is greater, stay
with me in the light a little longer. You light two cigarettes
at the same time, give me one. Tomorrow you will fly to Lesbos
to translate. The refugees will say shai, and you will saytea, home, Mecca, Ithaca, maqam, maqam, maqam.
~~~
For Adrienne Rich
[Our burden to carry as she did
shift the weight of song, heft and gnosis
“body poetics”
as a total event
her fullness rare in the amnesiac Kulchur
awake, awareness & urgency when poetry serves]



name appearseverywhere and in dreambody armor removedwhat now, legacy, archivumwe female archons preserve ofintensity a durance a hand you recognize(sounds sound)assurance as lives ondrank of thatdrank of thisalmost suffocated, then drowneddowned but neverwhat only she could only knowas herself living in the brute timespeak of a syntax of rendition?the politics of Empire chip awayas poetry attests, give it upcurve of a water-starved globeto follow and be following?racism, sexism, struggleeverything in intense grasp ofconsciousness — cut in crystal observationfor her rapid and perched intellectusprivacy opens to vibrant lightthis is stuff of Eros, of empathypassionate edge of Adriennethe American SkepticI feel you consociational in this lighta term of anthropology, to studyintersections in the annals we shareintergenerational, interspecies, interlanguagemove in parallelogramsgetting it right as she did Solstice, Boulder, Colorado 2012 High Park fires distress
~~~
After Otto Piene



How does beginning go how does
remembering without forgetting go
in front of me in the snow a man
his back lonesome somber
how does beginning go not remembering
flashes of light that showed him images when he
was a boy quick and blinding see the shadows
in the light how does not-remembering go
listen to the hissing see the light
and Germany’s lightness
how bright Germany is like soot
like images quick and blinding how does
beginning go smell the snow
it’s new it fell in the night
in the dark gets forgotten
in images quick listen to the snow
it lies light like linen
something’s burning a hissing somber
like images at night on walls listen
to the hissing smell the smell of burning
look at the soot on a white background
 
 Translated from the German
~~~
My roots are deep in southern life; deeper than John Brown or Nat Turner or Robert Lee. I was sired and weaned in a tropic world. The palm tree and banana leaf, mango and coconut, breadfruit and rubber trees know me.
Warm skies and gulf blue streams are in my blood. I belong with the smell of fresh pine, with the trail of coon, and the spring growth of wild onion.
I am no hothouse bulb to be reared in steam-heated flats with the music of El and subway in my ears, walled in by steel and wood and brick far from the sky.
I want the cotton fields, tabacco and the cane. I want to walk along with sacks of seed to drop in fallow ground. Restless music is in my heart and I am eager to be gone.
O Southland, sorrow home, melody beating in my bone and blood! How long will the Klan of hate, the hounds and the chain gangs keep me from my own?
~~~
My ancestors weren’t hippies, cotton
precluded fascination with flowers.
I don’t remember communes, I remember
ghettos. The riots were real, not
products of hallucinogens. Free love had
been at Redbones since black unemployment
and credit saturation.
 
The white women my mother cleaned
for didn’t notice she had changed. I guess
it was a small event, a resurrected African
jumping out the gap in her front teeth. I
guess it looked like a cockroach; that’s
what she was supposed to have, not dignity.
 
My mother just couldn’t get excited
about the Beatles, those mops she swilled
in ammonia everyday on their heads. Besides,
she didn’t work like a dog but like a woman;
they aren’t the same. The hair was growing long
for the same reasons Pinocchio’s nose did.
 
I can think only of a lesbian draping
crepe paper chains over my head to make a
black Rapunzel possible; that’s how a white
woman tried to lift my burdens. At the time
I didn’t reject her for being lesbian or
white but for both burdens. That was when
I didn’t want Ivory soap to be what
cleaned me, made me presentable to society.
All the suds I’d seen were white, they still
are but who cares? I’m more interested in
how soap dwindles in my hand, under the faucet.
 
I’m old enough to remember blocks
of ice, old enough or poor enough.
I remember chipping away at it, broken
glass all over the floor. Later in the
riots, the broken glass of looting tattled
how desperate people were to keep cool.
 
There are roses now in my mother’s yard.
Sometimes she cuts them, sets them in Pepsi
bottles throughout her rooms. She is,
I admit, being sentimental. Looting her
heart. My father who planted them is gone.
That mop in the corner
is his cane growing roots.
 
~~~
    Upon reading PM newspaper’s account of Mr. Roosevelt’s statement on the recent race clashes: “I share your feeling that the recent outbreaks of violence in widely spread parts of the country endanger our national unity and comfort our enemies. I am sure that every true American regrets this.”
What’d you get, black boy,
When they knocked you down in the
   gutter,
 And they kicked your teeth out,
And they broke your skull with clubs
And they bashed your stomach in?
What’d you get when the police shot
  you in the back,
And they chained you to the beds
While they wiped the blood off?
What’d you get when you cried out to
  the Top Man?
When you called on the man next to
  God, so you thought,
And asked him to speak out to save
  you?
What’d the Top Man say, black boy?
“Mr. Roosevelt regrets. . . . . . .”
 
~~~
a love person
from love people
out of the afrikan sun
under the sign of cancer.
whoever see my
midnight smile
seeing star apple and
mango from home.
whoever take me for
a negative thing,
his death be on him
like a skin
and his skin
be his heart’s revenge.
 
 
*
 
 
 
 
 
lucy one-eye
she got her mama’s ways.
big round roller
can’t cook
can’t clean
if that’s what you want
you got it world.
 
lucy one-eye
she see the world sideways.
word foolish
she say what she don’t want
to say, she don’t say
what she want to.
 
lucy one-eye
she won’t walk away
from it.
she’ll keep on trying
with her crooked look
and her wrinkled ways,
the darling girl.
 
 
*
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
if mama
could see
she would see
lucy sprawling
limbs of lucy
decorating the
backs of chairs
lucy hair
holding the mirrors up
that reflect odd
aspects of lucy.
 
if mama
could hear
she would hear
lucysong rolled in the
corners like lint
exotic webs of lucysighs
long lucy spiders explaining
to obscure gods.
 
if mama
could talk
she would talk
good girl
good girl
good girl
clean up your room.
 
 
*
 
 
 
 
 
i was born in a hotel,
a maskmaker.
my bones were knit by
a perilous knife.
my skin turned around
at midnight and
i entered the earth in
a woman jar.
i learned the world all
wormside up
and this is my yes
my strong fingers;
i was born in a bed of
good lessons
and it has made me
wise.
 
 
*
 
 
 
 
 
 
light
on my mother’s tongue
breaks through her soft
extravagant hip
into life.
lucille
she calls the light,
which was the name
of the grandmother
who waited by the crossroads
in virginia
and shot the whiteman off his horse,
killing the killer of sons.
light breaks from her life
to her lives…
 
mine already is
an afrikan name.
 
 
*
~~~
(in memory of José Antonio Burciaga, 1947-1996)                          

                     We are chameleons. We become chameleon.
                             —José Antonio Burciaga  ﻿



We are space between—

the black-orange blur

of a million Monarchs

on their two-generation migration

south to fir-crowned Michoacán

where tree trunks will sprout feathers,

a forest of paper-thin wings.

 

Our Mexica cocooned

in the membranes de la Madre Tierra

say we are reborn zacuanpapalotls,

mariposas negras y anaranjadas

in whose sweep the dead whisper.

 

We are between—

the flicker of a chameleon’s tail

that turns his desert-blue backbone

to jade or pink sand,

the snake-skinned fraternal twins

of solstice and equinox.

 

The ashen dawn, silvering dusk,

la oración as it leaves the lips,

the tug from sleep,

the glide into dreams

that husk out mestizo memory.

 

We are—

one life passing through the prism

of all others, gathering color and song,

cempazuchil and drum

to leave a rhythm scattered on the wind,

dust tinting the tips of fingers

as we slip into our new light.
~~~
Give me the night, you beasts hissing over the face of this dead
woman, I climb into your eyes, looking. To those who would sleep
through the wounds they inflict on others, I offer pain to help them
awaken, Ju-Ju, Tom-Toms & the magic of a talking burning bush.
I am the queen of sleight of hand wandering the forest of motives,
armed with horoscopes, cosmic encounters & an X-Acto knife. My
right eye is a projector flickering Hottentot & Huey Newton, my
left eye is prism of Wild Style, gold grills, lowriders, black dahlias,
blunts & back alleys. At twenty-one, I stood at the crossroad of Hell
& Here, evil peering at me behind a blue-red eye. I armed myself
with the memories of Pentecostal tent revivals, apple orchards, the
strawberry fields I roamed with my mother & aunts in the summer, 
& the sightings of UFO lights blinking in the black of an Ohio
nightsky. I am a weapon. I believe in hoodoo, voodoo, root workers, Dead Presidents, Black Tail, Black Inches & Banjees. I believe in the
ghosts of 60 million or more & black bones disintegrating at the
bottom of the Atlantic, below sea level, Not Just Knee Deep. I believe
that children are the future: love them now or meet them at dusk
at your doorstep, a 9mm in their right hand & a head noisy as a
hornet’s nest later. Your choice.
Black, still, in the hour of chaos, I believe in Royal Crown, Afro-Sheen, 
Vaseline, Jergens & baby powder on breasts, the collective conscious,
cellular memory, Public Enemies, outlaws, Outkast, elevations,
“Elevators” & Encyclopedia Britannica. Under my knife, El-Hajj Malik
El-Shabazz laughs with Muhammad Ali, a Lady named Day cuddles 
with a Boxer named Mister after traumatically stumbling on strange
fruit dangling from one of the most beautiful Sycamores evah. Under
my knife, Marilyn Monroe enjoys an evening out with Ella Fitzgerald,
meanwhile, Life shows me a gigantic photo. I am a weapon. I chart
voyages of unlove, high on a man called crazy who turns nigger into
prince. I believe in Jong, Clifton, “Dirty Diana” & Dilla, paper, scrilla,
green, gumbo, coins, Batty Bois & Video Vixens. I believe that beads
at the ends of braids are percussive instruments in double Dutch. 
In the reflection of my knife, Cab Calloway, Duke Ellington &
Thelonious Monk argue in a Basquiat heroin nod. I am a weapon.
I believe in goo-gobs of deep brown apple butter, alphabets, Alaga
Syrup, Affrilachians, A-salaam Alaikum, Wa-Alaikum-Salaam,
& African Hebrew Israelites. I believe in Octoroons, Quadroons,
Culluds, Cooley High, Commodores, Krumpin, Krunk & Burn,Hollywood, Burn.
I am Sethe crawling a field toward freedom with a whitegirl talking
about velvet. I believe in tumbleweaves, hot combs & hair lyes, Chaka
Khan, Shaka Zulu, Mau Mau, Slum Village & Buhloone Mindstate:
“Empty your mind, be formless, shapeless. Like water.” I believe
in water. My body is pulp. I bleed ink. I believe in the Fantastic, Vol.
2, The Low End Theory, Space Is the Place & The Hissing of Summer
Lawns. Tucked in the corner of my right ventricle sprouts a Tree of
Knowledge, lives a Shining Serpent & a middle finger. I’m on a quest
for the Marvelous. My face is a mask of malehood, malevolence, one
big masquerade. Metaphysically niggerish, I am a weapon wandering
the forest of motives, a machete in one hand, a mirror in the other,
searching for the nearest body of water.
~~~
             July 13, 2013



Saturday afternoon: in the driveway between buildings they blow up
balloons—yellow, red, blue—for a 3-year-old’s party.
 
The intermittent pops startle me like random gunfire—remind me
of birthdays brown boys will no longer celebrate.
 
The DJ, having set up the speakers, begins to play—the music, a rapid fire
of bass thump, commandeers the apartment. We have no choice but leave.
 
An art show: canvases colored with boxes and lines—a grid of red
on a backdrop of yellow. We speak of the abstract with wine in our mouths.
 
Meanwhile, in an antechamber, six are sequestered. They speak of mali-
cious intent, blood, evidence, testimony—murder versus manslaughter.
 
We arrive home to a throng of brown bodies, hands clutching red cups,
and music: its insistent treble stabbing the ears.
 
Inside, we slam all windows, but the music still blares as my niece shoots
people on the video game—its sounds are too realistic to bear.
 
Instead, the news, a verdict is in: not guilty. And everything is a blur
of sound, my heart beating so fast I put a hand to my chest.
 
I watch the TV screen: a collage of abstractions—spotlights, microphones,
smiles, handwritten signs. I stare, as if it were a painting—
 
a smear of twisted faces smothered in gesso and oil, a grid of red
on a backdrop of yellow—to make sense of.
 
The party continues. The 3-year-old probably in bed dreaming of melted
ice cream, and I am tired of partying.
 
There is a police station a half block away and I want it to burn. Instead,
only the smoke of weed, the meaningless music droning on,
 
the popping of balloons. Sunday morning, the birds are angry—their
chirping a noisy chant: NO NO NO NO. Outside, the rubbery flesh
 
of balloons color the driveway like splotches of paint. In an instant,
those still lives of heave and breath—gone in a pop.
 
~~~
We got sent home early& no one knew why. I think weare at war! I yelled to my sisterknapsacks ringing
against our backs. I copy-catted from Frances
who whispered it when the teachersgot silent. Can’t blame
me for taking a good idea.I collect words where I find them.
I’m young & no one aroundknows where my parents are from. 
A map on our wall & I circle allthe places I want to be. My auntie,
not-blood but could be,runs the oil through my scalp. 
Her fingers play the strands of my hair.The house smells like badam. 
My uncle, not-blood but could be,soaks them in a bowl of water. 
My auntie says my people mightbe Afghani. I draw a ship on the map.
I write Afghani under its hull. I countall the oceans, blood & not-blood,
all the people I could be,the whole map, my mirror.
The kids at school ask me where I’m from & I have no answer.
I’m a silent girl, a rig ready to blow. The towers fell two weeks
ago & I can’t say blow out loud or everyone will hate me.
They all make English their own, say that’s the bomb.
I know that word’s not meant for me but I collect words
where I find them. I practice at night, the crater
it makes of my mouth. I whisper it to my sheets,bombbombbombbombbombbombbombbombbombbombbombbombbomb
a little symphony, so round. I look up & make sure no one heard.
~~~
One of us is a faucet reconciling to the temperature
of indifference. This is the world: the drawer assembled
by you pinches a finger before yielding.There are so many foreigners here, I said, when I first stepped
onto a beach in Virginia. I had an idea of the ocean,
and of who I was. I am in water now, attempting to see
the ocean. We lick our wounds with the same tongue.
 
Long accustomed to carrying a gauze for shield, the heart
wraps bruises like dumplings. I see the sun
through my neighbour's window, whelked
in lace. Is this what we mean when we use the word "virtual"?
Tulips grow even after they're cut. The ones I loved,
having died without returning, crowd the heart's waiting room.
To start all over again is to imagine the world is, as it is.
I give up; I thought this was a poem about nation,
the one she began at nineteen. The one she waits to return
to: her eyes never adjusting to the colors of exile.
This antechamber; this long incision called hope.
 
Last night I crossed to the other side, unwelcome
territory. I might have been sad. My broke heart.
 
I'd been observing then, the sun's influence, subjugated
by streetlights imitating moonlight. Even the sun softens,
(I had thought to myself) to bring every image in view
as a memory of some other place, some other text.
Last night, I slept in a borrowed bed for guests
I anticipated, as host to self's solitary marriage.
I examined the world, thus altered. Later, standing
at the precipice, I awoke. Even sleep did not take me
back. And the signal—being green—I walked.
 
~~~
Ruffs are optional for trebles in Anglican church choirs.
— Wikipedia



Bored in the balcony reading your novel
hoping it will keep me awake — 
religion was always a blind spot — 
with my Sunday headache waiting for the service
to finish so I can retrieve my little chorister,
no god in us but song, while
pale important teenage Sophia
in blue head chorister ribbon,
face dumpy as a Flemish burgomaster,
bosses littler kids and loves
leading them expressionless
in paired rows from the choir stalls,
holding the processional cross high,
shushing and huffily eyeing them
for babyish disregard of cleanly neatness,
my own chorister dripping orts of tissues
she stows in her sleeves for sniffles,
in the choir room struggles
out of her ruff ringed dark brown inside
from years of child chorister sweat, hair oil, dead skin.
Me: Your other ruff was white and clean!
Her: Sophia said it was too big.
She gave me this one instead. I showed her
it was dirty and tight. She said “deal with it.”
~~~
Highlight Actions
Enable or disable annotations




Sometimes I thinkSometimes I think In a 2001 interview, Elizabeth Alexander noted, “As for the ‘banner headline’, ‘Race’, I always loved the way that my grandfather, and to a lesser extent my parents, used the word race to talk about ‘the race’ — meaning, of course, black people — as a thing that they could imagine, a body of people that we could imagine, that you could almost get your arms around, that the race was something tangible and palpable.” about Great-Uncle Paul who left Tuskegee,
Alabama
~~~
Some lamp sputters
its dusty light
across some desk.
Some hand, shaking,
works the strained
rope, twisting and knifing,
weaving, tugging tight
a bellowing circle. Randy
Travis, steamy drawl
and hiccup on the staticky
AM, backs the ritual
of drooping loop.
Sweat drips an awful
hallelujah. God glares
askance, but the artist
doesn’t waver—wrists
click cadence, knots
become a path to what
makes saviors. The sagging
hoop bemoans a need
to squeeze, its craving
for a breath within the ring.
~~~
Noon, March 6, 1997
 



From morning’s mouth
the bones emerge,
a prayer is whispered
over rounded horns;
the prairie is beyond
the quivering hump
and holy smoke sparkles
released in the breath.
Braided sweetgrass,
be about their hooves;
although the grip of hunger
lies heavy on the land,
let endless native grasses grow
among the yellow stones
and between the stars.
Even if only one man had
begun to sing, actually
it was thousands, She who came
to Wisconsin farmers
and transformed their lives,
She who brought her blessing
in the form of being newborn,
She whom they named the Miracle,
White Buffalo Calf Maiden must return
amid the fast firing of bullets, along
the most perilous of paths. Rock stars,
millionaires, they all offered millions of dollars
to struggling white farmers
but she had begun her transformation and her prophecy
by touching them and they came to understand
if not the actual words to the prayers
at least the reverence, the need
to protect, to keep the doors open.
Like it was a hundred years ago
bounties are gathered from death;
trains, buses, cars, planes
carry the segmented body of the terrible worm
across the land and the screams of the hunted
split the sun awake. It is time to restore
the stolen beads and shards,
the bones and knives to every grave.
And the graves are graves no longer but wombs;
the bounties burn their hands
and bones come flowing
from museum shelves
to dance in the rippling grass,
rebuilding lungs, starting hearts.
                                              There must be a hundred men
                                              and a hundred men’s worth
                                              of heartlessness; wished they could find
                                              Indians to kill but now that is illegal
                                              so they make up some excuse
                                              to raise their rifles and take aim,
                                              not hearing the rumble
                                              of buffalo prayer, not feeling
                                              tomorrow tremble
                                              or the prophecy of Miracle,
                                              and smile as they see the legs give way,
                                              the horns gouge open the prairie ground,
                                              Earth betrayed again.
~~~
Errol drives me to Treasure Beach It’s an old story, the terrible stormswerving the dark country roads the ship going down, half the sailorsI think about what you will be, your mix drowned, half swimming thewhite, black, Chinese, and your father’s slate waves, spat hard onto shoreScottish-Englishness. We cross the Black River Smashed crates, bodieswhere they shipped cane sugar and molasses choking on the black sandupstream past a sign One man stands — What is this place? A womanfor Lover’s Leap. The air stinks of sulphur in the trees, one hand raisedErrol drops me at a blue gate. Be safe This is how the Scotsmen camebehind the house, the thin beach why the black people here have red hairof black sand, the water warm and gray Or the other story, no stormI am deep before I know it, groundless no wrecked ship. Just the milesthe swell stops the sickness of cane fields and mulatto children namedunder a crooked tree, perched on sea rocks McDonald or McArthur fortwo fishermen in torn denims, smoking their fathers, who owned themI dry in the sun. They pass, turn, come close Nothing grows at Lover’s Leapthey have rust afros, gold faces splashed with freckles where two runawaysone ripped with muscle, one with eyes cornered by their master, held handslike razors. What you want here they say and jumped down into the clouds
~~~
 
                                                                              (February, 1841)
Melinda, I've been preparing to write.
That peculiar girl named Molly, 
who has a bit of liberty in the house,
has said she'll find some paper.
I have practiced mixing charred wood with water
and have managed to shave a twig
so one end nearly resembles a nib,
but tonight Lila got caught up
under the good Doctor's whip
for such a little offense. I am frightened.
Doctor Jackson brought in a new troop of slaves today.
A boy of thirteen among them had the welted cheek
that speaks of a driver's dissatisfaction.
Lila put a poultice on to ease the swelling,
but Jackson wants the boy to understand his place
and thinks a scar will help. Lila's back
and neck and arms have thirty new wounds
to replace the one she thought to heal.
Melinda, how is Jacob? Ever yours,
                                                                    (February, 1841)
Do you ever start at night believing
I might be dead? I leave my body
sometimes, Melinda. Is that all dying is?
Remember how I'd scold you
when the stew was thin, believing
I needed a thick stock to forge muscle
for all the work I had ahead?
Your stew would make me big again, Melinda.
Sometimes we have to trap, skin and roast
possum, rabbit, snake and squirrel.
Except for that, I have swallowed naught
but salt pork and coarse meal in all my days
away from you. But I work just fine.
Ever your beloved husband,
                                                                    (March, 1841)
What a herd of slaves Jackson brought in last month.
No sooner had their strength returned
after the long march to the farm from Lynchburg
but they began to plot another run.
We didn't know they'd planned to leave
until they were already gone a day.
All manner of neighborhood men
came around to tip Jackson's whiskey
and help him on the hunt, though
all they brought back for their trouble
were two bodies. One dead,
one fighting off living. That boy
I told you about, Ben with the slashed cheek?
At the stony fork of the river
Doc Jackson found his body, cut up,
twisted as if it had fought long
under water, a dead hand pointing
in the direction his netted sister and the "damned
lost lot of niggers" had run. I guess
he was too obstinate even for the water
to hold down easily. Jackson used Ben
like a scarecrow, his shirt hooked on a pole,
his body meant to warn us from the road.
Lila's still not certain that the girl will live.
Until tomorrow, I am ever your Joe.
                                                                    (December, 1843)
William is the name Smythe matched
to my description when he shipped me
from his Wilmington slave pen
to the Richmond consigner Jackson
bought me from. So I am William,
though it took more than one whipping
for me to remember it. There is a woman
keeps the kitchen here prefers we call her Auntie.
She's been called so many names
she "most forgets" which one means her.
I trust Jacob is getting on in school
just fine. I was, at his age, learning
to carry myself with the pride of a Freeman.
It's been many years since I've been able
to answer to any person calling me
that name. And Jacob? Can he remember
his father? Please hug him for me,
Melinda. I am ever your husband,
                                                                    (November, 1845)
How many live on our alley in Philadelphia?
There, this room might accommodate
a bed and two chairs, but here we are three men,
two women, some potions, and a girl. We sleep
in turns. Marlo often walks the woods at night,
his eye out on the traps for all of us.   'Dolphus steals sleep
in the smithing shop and steals everything else
before dawn. Just last week, we bore the tread
of a muzzled goat and two hens he brought in
from a neighbor's farm. Our field sweat adds stench
to the store of bones, feathers, brews, and herbs
Lila claims can cure the women on this place.
Sadie, who Lila never tried to stop herself from bearing,
sleeps with her body wedged behind the door.
Molly swings it in her side each night when she turns up
to sleep after Miss Amy's laudanum takes and again
when she races the conch call to the house in the morning.
Even Lena, who had a well-built cabin of her own
when she lived on the place, pushed four babies off her tit
to make room for the Doctor and for Miss Amy's boy.
I wonder, Melinda, are your wages enough,
since I went away, to satisfy the rent? Yours in tribulation,
                                                                    (December, 1847)
The Doctor's had his eye on Molly
since he caught her listening
while the tutor drilled his son on Greek.
She says the boy translates slowly.
On a war now, his spoiled tongue
has spent two days flogging
some warrior's impenetrable shield.
Molly showed me yesterday
what a heart looks like. Traced it
in the dirt that is my bed, my stool,
my desk, my cabin floor. I miss you, Melinda.
I miss feeling the little skip your heart took sometimes,
though I know the pinch that came along with the stutter
pained you.   Molly is a smart girl,
though brutal in her zeal. She's quicker
than a butcher to find cause to wield a knife.
I am certain the Doctor will lapse in his vigilance 
soon enough. Then I will chance to capture
on the page one of these letters. May God be good
and grant so large a prayer. Yours,
                                                                    (January, 1848)
We are like to lose another hand
unless 'Dolphus can recover
from the flogging he took
over a missing pair of cufflinks.
The girl who was brought home
with Ben's body was quickly well enough
to work, and she had less skin on her bones
than Doctor Jackson left on 'Dolphus.
Perhaps there is some little hope
for Lila's husband. Molly is afraid
to sneak me any of the Doctor's paper.
Molly, who can be as bad as 'Dolphus
about purloining pretty, useful things.
I doubted she was earnest in her fear,
but now I see what she, born here,
must have always known. A man
whose livelihood depends on stealing
the toil of other people's bodies
must keep a keen eye on his own
most dear and precious things.
 
~~~
One of the very first Indian words to enter the English language was the Hindustani slang for plunder: "loot."
WILLIAM DALRYMPLE



   It sits with a fork made from a lotus on an ivory chair eating an elephant steak in the company of bears and feral nautch girls on a monsoon evening incandescent with an appetite as mighty as railroads spann’d across seas and reclines, its cheeks burnished, its ass varnished by suns setting on bronze and sugared with saltpetre, its torso a tableaux for the annals of rectitude, the theatre for roiling or robust passage, a veritable Suez Canal towards missionary victories which thrust from such bejeweled and oiled loins anointed by coin— that emission of plump plums, lump sums into the Ganges, that coiling coy virgin maiden winding her languid locks, batting her lashes to its lashes— its spine a gentle wire. Supine, its belly swells with salt and figs with meat and treaties, it corks open a profound song— itself it sings into books heavy with truths on the chair dressed with leather and raw hides kissed by ox blood smeared with beef dung lined with raw silk woven from worms plucked from boughs basted across its pious beaming eyes its spidery ghosted lids, and its byzantine glance unmoors from its Chinese porcelain and crosses the ebony table polished with lac secreted from the cloaca of the kerria lacca set with glazed cakes eaten by pinked mouths wearing crimson robes, to its guests polished and glossed and stained by the ooze drawn to color the uncolored raw linen, the wood, the human. Then its wrist cuffed by gold and cowries and studded with coral draws a whisper- thin muslin veil dyed carmine— sucked from crushed scale of cochineal boiled in ammonia and bled into curds and rouge glinting sanguineous and turbid between bug and rug snug a thug in redcoat or a turncoat carrying urns of this stuff— from estates of cocoa coconut calico— across its face while soft éclairs of chocolate bumble out from its plumed rump choked with gum and linseed flax and cassia cinnamon and pepper like so many lines of blood underwriting the mutton and not the goat so it can sell them with a name of a place like scarves or garlanded whores moored to wharves suckled by mother of pearl or teas named after Earls and they with whole scores to settle settle for homemade cures nettles ginger turmeric— a paste or to taste—and it steals and seals in letters scented with sandal sent abroad waxed and pressed with cornelian gems honed from ground it owns and makes stone from their flesh ekes ink from their sweat soaks indigo in lye fermented with time and makes color so it can bid for its own passage, the passage, O of this soul, to India!   
~~~
 Man on Fire, 1969, by Luis Jiménez 
Because the facial features burn fastest.
Because the sun sets in Tibet before it ever rises in the West.
Because Tsering Tashi’s mother told him to dress in the thickest,  finest, llama wool chuba.
For I find no flattering explanation for the murder of everyone.
Flames consume the head, hands, and feet in the mural by Orozco.
Because monks don’t even eat meat.
His clothes made him torch; still Thích Quảng Đức’s heart would not fire.
Because his remains stiffened when they tried to place him in a tomb.
Because what is the point of murdering everyone in the world?
Since the sun sets in Vietnam before it reaches the West.
Because aren’t the faceless Mexicans always the ones we martyr?
Why do heretic Indians hurry to incinerate themselves at the stake?
Are you awake enough to remember how we clarify the skin of our slaves?
To feel the fingers of the children of thread flame stitching your voluminous rugs?
The candles in the basilica flicker when they channel the nightmares of the dead.
Because Jiménez wept when the mammoth blue mustang leg fell from heaven, rupturing the artery in his leg.
Because of Chinese soldiers armed to protect Tiananmen Square from monks burning to set themselves ablaze.
Luis says he’s sorry for the pain he caused you having to finish his stallion.
~~~
She brightens at the evidence. Like a strong appliance.
 
You can make it hot.
 
Grown ass people having tantrums.
 
I’m unbought, unheated. Like a perfectly square morsel of lasagna.
 
A wrathful rubics cube.
 
To realize, I wish to ridicule people interested in martial arts.
 
That I’m not getting better.
 
 
 
My uncle would prank call my father, “Immigration!”
 
He’d crow. And my father would fall to silence.
 
No matter the heavy accent.
 
No matter the voice he’d known unto boredom.
 
One wing swigging out to its brother on the other bird.
 
I measured this silence when I was a girl.
 
The quality of the joke and how it rested
 
on the bad stomach of a tensile citizenry.
 
The joke was that, in an instant,
 We Lost Everything.
 
 
 
It is important to remember who would laugh first—
 
the perpetrator/uncle/jokester or the assailed/father/feather.
 
Or maybe, it isn’t.
 
Maybe what you should know is that
 
they told this joke over and over and ever.
 
My uncle crowed. My father disbelieved. We lost everything.
 
And then, the svelte, sweet brier laughter.
 
~~~
One figure is female, the other is male.
Both are contained.
One figure is mythical, the other historical.
To the extent that one can be said to have existed at all, they occupy different millennia, different continents.
But, to the extent that one can be said to have existed at all, both figures are considered Asian—one from Colchis, one from Korea.
To mention the Asianness of the figures creates a “racial marker” in the poem.
This means that the poem can no longer pass as a white poem, that different people can be expected to read the poem, that they can be expected to read the poem in different ways.
To mention the Asianness of the figures is also to mention, by implication, the Asianness of the poet.
Revealing a racial marker in a poem is like revealing a gun in a story or like revealing a nipple in a dance.
After such a revelation, the poem is about race, the story is about the gun, the dance is about the body of the dancer—it is no longer considered a dance at all and is subject to regulation.
Topics that have this gravitational quality of aboutness are known as “hot button” topics, such as race, violence, or sex.
“Hot button” is a marketing term, coined by Walter Kiechel III, in a September 1978 issue of Fortune magazine.
The term evokes laboratory animals and refers to consumer desires that need to be slaked.
The term “hot button” suggests not only the slaking of such desires but also a shock or punishment for having acted on those desires, a deterrent to further actions pursuing such desires, and by extension, a deterrent to desire itself.
Violence and sex are examples of desires and can be satisfied, punished, and deterred.
Race is not usually considered an example of desire.
Both the female and the male figures are able to articulate their desires with an unusual degree of candor and specificity.
Both are responsible for many sexual deaths.
The male figure says, “When anger grips me, I cannot contain myself. Only after I kill something—a person, perhaps an animal, even a chicken—can I calm down.... I am sad that Your Majesty does not love me and terrified when you criticize me. All this turns to anger.” “Your Majesty,” here, refers to the king, his father.
The female figure is never directly quoted, but Pseudo-Apollodorus writes that she casts a spell upon the king her husband so that when he has sex with another woman, he ejaculates wild creatures into the woman’s vagina, thereby killing her. Although the punishment is enacted on the body of the woman, this punishment is meant to deter the king from slaking his desires.
Both figures, royal themselves, are angry at the king, but neither attempts to kill the king—which would be political. Instead they displace this anger onto other unnamed deaths, which are considered sexual but not political.
Both figures have spouses known for strategy, for self-preservation in  politically tumultuous times, times of many unnamed deaths.
Both figures are counterfoils to their strategizing spouses, figures of excessive  desire, requiring containment.
Both containers are wooden.
Both containers are camouflaged with a soft, yielding substance—one with grass, one with fur.
Both containers are ingenious solutions to seemingly intractable problems.
One problem is political. One problem is sexual.
They are both the same problem.
They have the same solution.
The male figure waits in the container for death to come. He waits for eight days. His son will live. This ensures the succession, the frictionless transfer of power.
The female figure waits in the container for the generation of a life. We do not know how long she waits. Her son will die, after waiting in his own wooden container. This ensures the succession, the frictionless transfer of power.
There are many artistic representations of both containers.
The male figure’s container is blockish, unadorned, a household object of standard size and quotidian function. Tourists climb into it and pose for photos, post them online. The cramped position of their bodies generates a combination of horror and glee. This, in turn, creates discomfort, the recognition that horror and glee should not be combined, that such a combination is taboo.
The female figure’s container is customized, lushly contoured. Its contours are excessively articulated to the same degree that her desire is excessively articulated. Artists depict the container in cutaway view, revealing the female figure within, awaiting the wild creature. The abject position of the female figure—on all fours, pressing her genitalia back against the hollow cow’s genitalia—generates a combination of lust and revenge. This, in turn, creates discomfort—the recognition that lust and revenge should not be combined, that wild creatures and female figures should not be combined, that these combinations are taboo.
Hot button topics are taboo because they generate discomfort.
The male figure slakes his violent desires and is punished. The male figure also functions as a hot button, a means whereby the violent desires of tourists  are slaked, while generating discomfort in these tourists.
The female figure slakes her sexual desires and is punished. The female  figure also functions as a hot button, a means whereby the sexual desires of artists are slaked, while generating discomfort in these artists.
The tourist can climb into the rice chest. The tourist can pose for a photo in the rice chest. Then the tourist can climb out of the rice chest and walk away.
The artist can look into the hollow cow. The artist can render the contours of the hollow cow, the contours of the female figure. Then the artist can walk away.
Both containers allow the tourist and artist to touch the hot button, the taboo.
The desire and the discomfort remain contained.
Both containers allow the tourist and the artist to walk away.
The male and female figures remain contained.
Neither container—the rice chest, the hollow cow—appears to have any necessary connection to race.
To mention race where it is not necessary to mention race is taboo.
I have not mentioned the race of the tourist or the artist.
The tourist and the artist are allowed to pass for white.
The tourist and the artist are not contained.
I have already mentioned the race of the poet.
But to the extent that the poet is not contained, the poet is allowed to pass for white.
I have already mentioned the race of the male and female figures.
The male and female figures are contained.
The rice chest and the hollow cow are containers.
The rice chest and the hollow cow are not the only containers in this poem.
Colchis and Korea are containers in this poem.
Asianness is a container in this poem.
Race is a container in this poem.
Each of these containers contains desire and its satisfaction.
Each of these containers contains discomfort and deterrence.
Each of these containers contains a hot button, a taboo.
The tourist and the artist can enter each of these containers.
The tourist and the artist can touch the hot button and walk away.
Each of these containers separates the slaking of desire from the punishment of desire.
Each of these containers is an ingenious solution to a seemingly intractable problem.
They are the same problem.
They have the same solution.
Each of these containers ensures the frictionless transfer of power.
Each of these containers holds a male or female figure.
The name of the male figure can be translated as “Think of me in sadness.”
The name of the female figure can be translated as “I shine for all of you.”
~~~
In the constant lutte to not become that bougie housewife of an athlete taking too much oxy while the help cooks ethical fried chicken for my family and I’m also the help and the television sighs and wags in the back     some Wendy Williams   rerun and     this is acceptable and celebrating neon israel and soul     is so radio :     I walk alone.   I know myself. Or so I chant in the mirror right around discovering that trap music is all the new negro spiritual / righteous delirium try to defund the clown in the en   in negro       say it a little   less     enter the New Yorker in Desdemona’s     scarf     and be this generative   productive whistle     blower for the radicals / coal at the root of slow kill and not scream     at the Salvadorian man with the leaf blower   in my landscape     and hide him and his hoes       when the ICE raid follows and swallow mister PCs   pcp    ,   in this constant     creaseless / as in iron willed / as in   willow weep for me /     effort to love my enemy I became him       The body of me. Its erotic     disbelief temporarily suspended .    alongside the American eagle     : temptation to define freedom     as   consumerism, justice as my right to an object in a special whites only window : see that seedless eagle run the heavens so : suspended and     hovering over my own safe house and spraying it with liquid hog manure     literally. Check WikiLeaks.     Assange looks like a creep but he saves everybody but himself     so   he must be.         Negro do you wanna be that     creepy?
~~~
listen, a bad thing happened to
my friend’s marriage, can’t tell you
only can tell my own story which
so far isn’t so bad:
“Dad” and I stay married. so far.
so good. so so.
But it felt undoable. This lucky life
every day, every day. every, day.
(all the poetry books the goddamn same
until one guy gets up and stuns the audience.)
Joe Wenderoth, not by a long shot
sober, says, I promised my wife I wouldn’t fuck
anyone
~~~
with respect to Zora and the Ground of the African Church



Sorrowtalked eye-to-eye forgiven is no mere burden.
The one who sings is no mere beast.
The one who slips the harness of the horror stands alive
            as earth. 
Today I can watch the wind and it is blue smoke.
I shake myself inside my dress, consider rain and choose
            Shine.
I was walking down Mississippi River Street
            and a ghost stopped me.
No one could see it but me,
standing in the middle of the sidewalk
smilin at a haint with his hat in his hand
     instead of his head when he can tote that too. 
     When one mule die
     the rest neigh-cry
     till the wagon take the dead thing away.
 
     Mississippi River Street rampant with noise,
     radiant, won’t hold still.
     But I have walked on blue black water.
     Watched dead rise before the wagon came. 
     Everywhere I see mules,
     open mouths sing blues, then be human, then
     beyond. 
Funerals, weddings, baptisms
I take off my skin, hang it up
like a soaked quilt to dry the tears
and sweat from feeling. I stand naked before Church,
holding Dr. Watts closer than my sagging, girlish breasts.
My soul wears no clothes when she sing.
It is all being in love with more than one
man who is one whole man you can look into his eyes
without blinking. 
     Where would I go to hide?
Dr. Watts standing with my skin hooked on his finger
and I am next to him solid and living the song
            with no words     .
that every born-again mule knew in death and in life
            before
birth, now hums true again hot in the chest and throat
breaking natural out the mouth like breathing. 
     Where would I go to hide?
Sit down, rock my soul like my baby and Dr. Watts
climb in my lap and moan for the milk no mother can buy
            or borrow
only make in hearts of her eyes, in lines of the palms
            of her hands.
And where would I find lines with no skin? 
     Where would I go to hide?
I tell you I am living now. Like in Mississippi
Grandmama’s bedroom sitting on the high bed
     you could break
          your neck leaving.
Cousin Chubby said fried fish, greens, and cornbread was
good eatin. I am good livin. Blue smoke watching,
naked, haint-smiling, entertaining Dr. Watts, dreaming
of a man with a white liver who can’t kill me,
who love mulish women, hainted ones,
     I am the sainted one
naked with no sense of memory but good like God rocking
hums in my lap and looking for no hiding place even if
wind be blue smoke hurricane and I make red milk
in the hearts of my eyes and reach out my lifelines to
a hopeless haint I can stand myself. 
Naked now, where would I want to go to hide? From this
funeral wedding death and birth baptism
the sliding tears washing my soul cleaner than
Dr. Watts’ whistle or the look in a sweatin man’s
eyes when he lookin at a perfect, brutal sun
killing him with living while he lick his lips and dream
of water, then put his shoulder behind a woman
guiding him while he dig in and groove the earth
            to the quick
deep endless quick. 
     Where would I go
     Where would I go to hide this
     yes-crying love yielding beyond flesh yet
     subsumed by sweat 
     Where would I go naked so
     following blues and Dr. Watts
     like a double-seeing shadow
     standing before you with only blue smoke
     between us
     humming yes and yes and yes 
     subsumed by sweat and yielding
     beyond mere flesh. 
~~~
[imprisonment boom has developed] [a built-in growth dynamic] [the
number of prisoners continues to grow while crime drops] [and had
even prevented] [Crime never does stay down for long] [experts say]
[though crime has been declining for six years] [In 1996, the incarcera-
tion rate for black men was] [eight times the rate for white men]
[Crime never does stay down for long] [experts say] [a built-in growth
dynamic] [independent of crime] [Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals]
[and had even prevented] [Crime never does stay]
[recent radio interview] [sheriff] [declared proudly] [“sexually explic-
it”] [he has formed the first women’s chain gang] [in the world] [More
than two-thirds of the prisoners] [pre-trial defendants] [sheriff]
[defines “sexually explicit” as] [“personal photographs, drawings, mag-
azines, and pictorials that show frontal nudity”] [if that painting would
affect prison security] [the judge agreed] [allowing materials depicting
“frontal nudity” in the cells] [could lead to] [harassment of female
guards, creating a “hostile work environment”] [sheriff] [declared
proudly] [formed the first women’s chain gang] [on more than 500 talk
shows] [“sexually explicit”]
[Some expressed the opinion] [American marines and officials had done
too little] [to dig out] [victims from the rubble] [in the crucial early
hours of the disaster] [and had even prevented] [Some expressed the
opinion] [materials depicting frontal nudity] [could lead to unconstitu-
tional conditions] [including excessive use of force against inmates]
[deliberate indifferent to inmates’ serious medical needs] [creating a
“hostile work environment”] [those who died were] [all Tanzanians
employed by the embassy] [including excessive use of force against
inmates and deliberate indifference] [to dig out] [victims from the rub-
ble] [“environment”]
[materials depicting frontal nudity] [could lead to conflict among pris-
oners] [two inmates could get into a fight if the atheist said, “Look at
the size of the genitals on Jesus Christ”] [materials depicting nudity]
[are “reasonably likely” to be] [the cause of violence] [a Michelangelo
painting of a nude Christ] [an inmate] [was banned from havingPlayboy delivered to his cell] [if that painting would affect a prison securi-
ty] [experts say] [“Look at the size of the”] [sheriff]
[relatives of victims expressed a quiet outrage] [“personal pho-
tographs”] [too little to help] [Kenyans were paying with their lives for
American foreign policy decisions] [a built-in growth dynamic]
[embassies will always be vulnerable] [searchng for survivors] [They
are not designed to be armed forts in hostile territory] [“We trained
cameras on the street”] [“suspicious vehicles were reported”] [The larg-
er the number of prisoners] [experts say] [the bigger the number of
people who will someday be released] [There were no American deaths
in the Tanzanian bombing, officials said]
[to help them extricate] [including excessive use of force] [several
Kenyan rescue workers complained] [American marines and other
American officials] [and had even prevented] [them from taking dead
Kenyans out of the embassy] [from searching for survivors there] [And
embassies will always be vulnerable] [“personal photographs, draw-
ings, magazines, and pictorials that show frontal nudity”] [are reason-
ably likely] [to be] [the cause of violence] [“If it’s a war between the
Americans and other people, they should take the war elsewhere”] [to
help them extricate people] [Many of the inmates are housed in tents]
[in hostile territory] [there were no American] [quiet outrage] [frontal
nudity]
[either because of their own criminal propensities or] [a Michelangelo
painting of a nude Christ] [in the crucial early hours of the disaster]
[rescue workers] [Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals] [“If it’s a war
between the Americans and other people”] [sheriff] [if that painting
would affect] [armed forts in hostile territory] [to help them extricate
people] [either because of their own criminal propensities or] [will
always be vulnerable] [Many relatives of the victims] [of racial dispari-
ty in the nation’s prisons] [materials depicting “frontal nudity” could
lead to conflicts among prisoners]
[though crime has been declining] [the incarceration rate for black men
was eight times the rate for white men] [either because of their own
criminal propensities or] [more than 500 talk shows] [Several Kenyan
rescue workers complained] [Crime never does stay down] [including
excessive use of force] [there are also sharp regional differences] [7 of
the 10 states] [being in the South] [the incarceration rate] [banned from
having Playboy] [“should take the war elsewhere”]
[harrassment of female guards] [unconstitutional conditions] [excessive
use of] [Drug Enforcement Administration] [drug crimes constituted
the biggest source of growth for female inmates] [statistical branch of
the Justice Department] [housed in tents] [materials depicting “frontal
nudity”] [a Michelangelo painting of a nude Christ] [drug crimes]
[deliberate indifference to medical needs] [if the atheist said] [“sexually
explicit”] [“personal photographs”] [recent radio interview] [“most
people who work in the prison business”] [“don’t look for drops in
crime”] [due process] [Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals]
[the larger the number of prisoners] [Several Kenyan rescue workers
complained] [dig out victims from the rubble] [“most people who
work in the prison business”] [independent of crime rate] [female
inmates] [depicting “frontal nudity”] [American foreign policy deci-
sions] [statistical branch of the Justice Department] [Playboy] [“should
take the war elsewhere”] [either because of their own criminal propen-
sities or] [American]
[black men] [will always be vulnerable] [because they are not
designed] [if a painting could affect] [being in the South]
[Michelangelo] [“We trained cameras”] [“personal photographs”]
[“suspicious vehicles”] [the judge agreed] [Playboy] [in his cell]
[female inmates] [“frontal nudity”] [female guards]
[in the crucial early hours of] [Playboy] [those who died were all] [the
cause of violence] [or their experience behind bars] [Drug Enforcement
Administration] [“most people who work in the prison business”]
[sheriff] [because they are not designed] [either because of] [the larger
the number of prisoners] [Crime never does] [show “frontal nudity”]
[the first women’s chain gang]
[Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals] [of racial disparity] [while crime
drops] [and had even prevented] [Christ] [the cause of violence]
[American marines and officials] [has helped reduce] [black men] [due
process] [rate for black men was] [stay down] [“Look at the size of
the”] [Drug Enforcement Administration] [number of prisoners]
[incarceration rate] [“If it’s a war”] [on the street] [get into a fight] [get
into a fight if the atheist said] [American marines and officials had done
too little to help] [Michelangelo]
~~~
You may write me down in history
With your bitter, twisted lies,
You may trod me in the very dirt
But still, like dust, I'll rise.
Does my sassiness upset you?
Why are you beset with gloom?
’Cause I walk like I've got oil wells
Pumping in my living room.
Just like moons and like suns,
With the certainty of tides,
Just like hopes springing high,
Still I'll rise.
Did you want to see me broken?
Bowed head and lowered eyes?
Shoulders falling down like teardrops,
Weakened by my soulful cries?
Does my haughtiness offend you?
Don't you take it awful hard
’Cause I laugh like I've got gold mines
Diggin’ in my own backyard.
You may shoot me with your words,
You may cut me with your eyes,
You may kill me with your hatefulness,
But still, like air, I’ll rise.
Does my sexiness upset you?
Does it come as a surprise
That I dance like I've got diamonds
At the meeting of my thighs?
Out of the huts of history’s shame
I rise
Up from a past that’s rooted in pain
I rise
I'm a black ocean, leaping and wide,
Welling and swelling I bear in the tide.
Leaving behind nights of terror and fear
I rise
Into a daybreak that’s wondrously clear
I rise
Bringing the gifts that my ancestors gave,
I am the dream and the hope of the slave.
I rise
I rise
I rise.
~~~
they thought the field was wasting
and so they gathered the marker rocks and stones and
piled them into a barn    they say that the rocks were shaped
some of them scratched with triangles and other forms    they
must have been trying to invent some new language they say
the rocks went to build that wall there guarding the manor and
some few were used for the state house
crops refused to grow
i say the stones marked an old tongue and it was called eternity
and pointed toward the river    i say that after that collection
no pillow in the big house dreamed    i say that somewhere under
here moulders one called alice whose great grandson is old now
too and refuses to talk about slavery    i say that at the
masters table only one plate is set for supper    i say no seed
can flourish on this ground once planted then forsaken    wild
berries warm a field of bones
bloom how you must i say
~~~
“The conquest is not sustainable . . .”
                                  —Winona LaDuke
 




thanks for bringing that
to our attention
she said the first time
to my response to a history text
about a famous painting
of the Battle of Quebec
that never mentioned the French
and only mentioned Indians twice,
once as nuisances, once
as the noble savage
kneeling by the dying
English general
this was during
the French and Indian war
I said, soon thousands
of French and Indian people
would be displaced, sold
into indentured servitude
my own family among them
there would be bounties
on the heads of Abenaki people
in Maine, and the English
would sow the fields of the Mohawks
with salt
thanks for bringing that up,
she said
the next book mentioned
cannibals in the Caribbean,
Indians who believed the Spanish were
gods, Indians killing themselves, Indian
women in love with Spanish pricks, Indians
whose names, even when known, were
passed over in favor of the ones
given them by the Spanish
stop writing about
Indians
she told me
you’re making everyone
feel guilty
but the next book
was back in Maine
home territory
the diary of a midwife
right after that same
French and Indian war
and she was using herbs
not found in English herbals
and wrote that a “young
squaw” visited her
over a period of
three weeks, but
the famous historian
said only that
there may have been
Indians in the area,
while she wrote
at length about
white men dressing up
as Indians
to protest against the rich
stealing their lands
stop writing about Indians
she told me again
only louder as if
I was hard of hearing
you have to allow authors
their subjects, she said
stop writing about
what isn’t in the text
which is just our entire history
this week, she said
I’m really upset
you’re telling the same story
three times
because there’s only
one story about Indians
and we all know what it is
so I asked her if there are an
infinite number of stories about
white people
and she told me to
stop being racist
so I stayed away from class for a week
because they were reading a book
about a mystery in the Everglades
and I knew there had to be
Indians in that swamp
and I didn’t want to have to
write about Indians
again
it was on to the next book
written, she said by
a Cherokee writer,
which Leslie Silko, who is Laguna,
will be interested to find out
because the book was Ceremony
but that is a small mistake
sort of like saying that
Dante is Chinese, so
I overlooked it
now, she told me
write about Indians
and I might have done that
except she went on
about Indians putting on
a mask of whiteness
like white people put on
black face, and some of the students
wrote it down in their notebooks
and everyone started talking about
minstrel shows
then she wanted me to tell her
if there is such a thing as
an Indian world view
and I said, well, yes and no,
which I figured was safe
since I would be at least
half-right whichever answer
she wanted, but when I mentioned
the European world view,
she said there isn’t any such thing
which was quite a relief to me,
I hate to think there were a
whole lot of people thinking in
hierarchies and as if the
earth is a dead object and
animals and plants and some people
not having spirit
then she said I’d better stick
to what I know, that is,
Indians, which is what
I was trying to do in the first place,
and that maybe European philosophy
was too much for my primitive
brain in spite of its being my
undergraduate major
and I pointed out that the
oppressed always know more
about the oppressor than vice
versa, so she just glared at me
and told me that I look
Scandinavian
which was a surprise to me
and I wondered why I never was a
prom queen since it was always the
Scandinavian girls who got that
honor, maybe they never
noticed I was one of them. Exactly
how much Indian are you anyway?
she asked. I told her I guessed
I was pretty much Indian. I
suppose she wondered
why I wouldn’t accept that mask of
whiteness she kept talking about
as myself
 
~~~
Filene’s department store
near nineteen-fifty-three:
An Aunt Jemima floor
Display. Red bandanna,
apron holding white rolls
of black fat fast against
the bubbling pancakes, bowls
and bowls of pale batter.
This is what Donna sees
across the “Cookwares” floor,
and hears “Donessa?” Please,
this can not be my aunt
~~~
Hear me
Neglect turned everything to gold
Midas touch     I turn the comfortable
To the dead     an anti-elegy tho     I’m
Learning not to mourn what I make
It’s a complex     this gravity I birth unknowing
Not my complex     yours     say it
I am owned by several things     all of  them
Inherited from a horizon claimed before
I was languaged     Invoke the historical
Somethingsomethingsomething Chains
Somethingsomethingsomething Unworthy
I’m citizen of a clumsy imperative
Belonging     is a concern of a self   I deaded
Past participle implies the historical is a mob
Try again     I mobbed my own lonely and was legion
Play some offense then     Gold the impossible wound
Citizen of  betrayal     Citizen of the going going going —
Recursion     this fugitive state as native to me as my father’s
Eyes     chestnut of a tree felled before we were languaged
See   Inheritance is a hell of a drug     We Black and highly valued
For our Flex     I said what I said     and became citizen
Of  this petty excuse for forever     Flex on ’em then
Invocation of the bicep I have and the bicep throttling me
I live here now     Mississippi     and everywhere is everywhere
That someone may have escaped from     Fugitive
A sad motivation for river     It’s a strange thing
That belief you are beautiful be a subversion of the water
But here I am     winter gasping at the conditions
Too weak to even strangle the grass to soil     No instead
Trees feathered with their hollowed offspring
Here the wind don’t howl just blooms a militia
Of castanets     seven people were lynched here
I looked it up and nobody will tell me which tree
You are not as tired of the image as I am of uncertainty
Every day the rain threatens     Every day my same imperious lonely
Hear me     the sun ran like a punk     the sun ran like it owed
Not even the gold     is trustworthy     why gold?
Because it was the color of my love     and by extension
The life I buried here     Gold the genesis of one lonely
My ancestors were traded mere miles from here     Gold the genesis
Of  another     I know they are not the same in anything but geography
Still it is an act of   Flex just to stand anywhere     gravity being what it is
Attempt the volta toward impossible     Midas the lonely into a radif
Dreams of living life like a gilded garrote
                                                                                     Flex
The crown of scar tissue still the crown
                                                                                     Flex
Go to therapy if  you scared
                                                                                     Flex
Shuck the fear out of  the opposition
                                                                                     Flex
Every day gold for the sake of your attention
                                                                                     Flex
Your hereness a mountain plumed with trees
Branches hemmed like unplayed notes
A history can be undone with less than an alphabet
Amend the scandal of the time that brought you here
Fled to Flex     Ex. My family fled from Mississippi
My family Flexed from Mississippi     and you become
The muscle driving you forward     See     you were ugly
Once     because you believed it     Dire invocation
I am some kind of unkillable and don’t know how to act
Everything I said I couldn’t live without
                                                                                     Gone
Lucky me     to be born into a language of mistakes
I leave the violent on Seen and watch them wither
Turns out I was their gravity     their forgetful sovereign
I Flex     they flinch     the sonics of the words     cousins
By virtue of a pistol     This is how I was taught to bridle
Sadness like an American     Run with a band of  kids
With silver caps     so you know we bad     waiting for the bone
Eviction     Flex like value native to your mouth     Tooth out
A tiny moon     a second grin shimmering in your palm     Flex
The loss     the cost is secondary   Hear me     a life I had ended
While I was trying to pursue the life I wanted     by pursuing
A loss cobwebbed as a bride     All of this true the calcium winnowing
Under the gold     I widowed my own comfort     I am in danger
My squad an echo     my squad a promise you get dead someday
If you touch me     thus I’m untouched     Neglect killed the grass
The dead turn to gold before they resurrect     I am framed
By a pastoral I might have escaped once     O the history
O the lineage     the renowned Flex of survivors     I’m here
I’m back     muscled like a creek          or the whisper
That threads a storm miles later     Maybe not     Stick to the facts
I’m alive despite a growing and planetary grief     I wear a chain
Somedays     and a sweatshirt that translates to     I Am ComingBack For What Is Mine     Gaudy surprise on the faces of children
Of owners     They think I am impossible     They think I am a ghost
I Medusa like my daddy taught me     their eyes wilt and are
Ill-tended grapes consumed by the skull     I’m metaphoring
I told you     I don’t know how to act     but I know how to anthem
My lyric loose and I got time today     I’m the type of  bad
No synonym alive can hold
~~~
—for Travis and Vaughan and all the St. Catherine’s Indian School kids  
dust, leaves twirling
whirlpool
up off road
under wheels
undercarriage
automotive    winds
turning,    lifting
giving force to such
delicate    particles
ends attached in former
position to branch
soft paper thin petal-
like reds and golds
much as the mane swings
blows back    from higher
plane winds    Percheron    gold
mane    that red Percheron
on the right
the north side
you’ve seen her
in the early morning
when it’s snowing she
raises her dignity
laughing at motorists
distressed by ice
and Pueblo patrol cars
we catch in peripheral
focus    signal    turn the
halogens off and on
on and off    until
they code the signal
distress signal
approaching tribal police
traffic trap
commuting    the
35 mph racket
through Nambe
Pojoaque turn    50
Tesuque Bingo/Pull-Tabs
long before the lodge
turned stone    near Camel Rock
before the Congested Area in
approach to the
“City of the Oldest Catholic Church in North America”
we convey these
danger signs    to
local yokels    perhaps even
tourists    if we’re in the mood
consideration
strange nation
neither of us belong
though    we do stay
in close    proximity to
these other    Native peoples
very different than where we
come from    still the same
only    sometimes    though
they know the patrol
man he’s their cousin
all of theirs
they know this whirl
these leaves    rising now
before our heated grill
Chevy 4x    ’91
they know the Percheron
she steals the scenery easily
with her laughter and turn
pitching hoof and tail
in mockery    indispensable humor
she takes this morning
under gray the shade of nickel
to cloud the stress enabling
me to speak to you of
beauty
~~~
By nature Indians are very lazy and sworn enemies of work.
They prefer to suffer hunger than to fatigue themselves
with agriculture. Therefore, they must be forced to do this by their
superiors. With six industrious Europeans one can do more
in one day than fifty Indians
—Joseph Och, Missionary in Sonora: Travel Reports
of Joseph Och, S.J., 1755-1767
 



Mining: The Indian is naked, swinging
quarter to half hundredweight steel-edged crowbars.
He climbs beams with notches set step by step,
carrying ore in plaited baskets
on his shoulders.
They are given one half-bushel of maize per week.
This is their payment unless they have a family–
then they are given two half-bushels.Two men using a wheelbarrow could haul out
more than can thirty lazy Indians
working an entire day.
~~~
On our dining table, every dish is a dime-store pattern:
blue dandelions, red nasturtiums, the entire stack,
a small legacy won in a 1959 coin toss
by Lealand, the uncle with the long arms
and legs, who pitched penny after penny
at a parking lot carnival until his pockets
were emptied of everything, but lint and luck.
My family wouldn't buy Emporium bowls
thick like heads of cabbage or soup spoons
holding hand-painted water lilies;
our plates, chipped and resounding,
clatter at every feast. In America,
we acquired what was necessary:
some English to earn a living, cotton
for dull work, enough noodles for a long life.
My father and uncles fled China
with a black leather trunk, four wool sweaters,
and proud photographs of their two-story mansion.
They rented on Mason, Alfred's Steakhouse clanging
all night below. Great-Uncle's wife
donated a lazy susan, mini Bora Bora
pitchforks, and wooden bowls, rancid
from salad oil—whatever she couldn't unload
at her yard sale. Sundays, she invited
her nephews to hang coats, change diapers,
and serve finger sandwiches, told guests,ignore those farmboys, too stupid to say yes or no.
The boys didn't tell her about the jars of jade
or the "big house," its pond
swimming with yolk-eating carp.
They studied calculus and chemistry
and worked after school, eighty-five cents an hour,
pouring coffee at Mee Heung Bakery
and ironing pleats in sweat shops
towards a new life: chicken and fresh fish
every day, wonton noodle soup and television
at midnight, Grace Kelly on weekends. When I get off the boat,America is a beautiful country, my father says
as he watches Uncle Lealand, the organoleptic specialist, dish up
the leftover black bean lobster for his cats.
~~~
After you finish your work
after you do your day
after you've read your reading
after you've written your say –
you go down the street to the hot dog stand,
one block down and across the way.
On a blistering afternoon in East Harlem in the twentieth
    century.
Most of the windows are boarded up,
the rats run out of a sack –
sticking out of the crummy garage
one shiny long Cadillac;
at the glass door of the drug-addiction center,
a man who'd like to break your back.
But here's a brown woman with a little girl dressed in rose
    and pink, too.
Frankfurters frankfurters sizzle on the steel
where the hot-dog-man leans –
nothing else on the counter
but the usual two machines,
the grape one, empty, and the orange one, empty,
I face him in between.
A black boy comes along, looks at the hot dogs, goes on
    walking.
I watch the man as he stands and pours
in the familiar shape
bright purple in the one marked ORANGE
orange in the one marked GRAPE,
the grape drink in the machine marked ORANGE
and orange drink in the GRAPE.
Just the one word large and clear, unmistakeable, on each
    machine.
I ask him : How can we go on reading
and make sense out of what we read? –
How can they write and believe what they're writing,
the young ones across the street,
while you go on pouring grape in ORANGE
and orange into the one marked GRAPE –?
(How are we going to believe what we read and we write
    and we hear and we say and we do?)
He looks at the two machines and he smiles
and he shrugs and smiles and pours again.
It could be violence and nonviolence
it could be white and black          women and men
it could be war and peace or any
binary system, love and hate, enemy, friend.
Yes and no, be and not-be, what we do and what we don't
    do.
On a corner in East Harlem
garbage, reading, a deep smile, rape,
forgetfulness, a hot street of murder,
misery, withered hope,
a man keeps pouring grape into ORANGE
and orange into the one marked GRAPE,
pouring orange into GRAPE and grape into ORANGE forever.
~~~
Stairs & rites
not for the foot
The building
thinks
Angular rock
Green skyscraper
Black ziggurat
Miniature
of time
Made
into altar
Invention
of the night
Sprouting
at dawn
Carved rock
praying
as it buds
Seeking the seed
to sprout!
Saliva
in torrents
Cooling waterfall
You redeem your field
Salt head
Stream
of lights
Double reflection
Stone
& water
The same
sprouting
 
~~~
Therefore, no more recounting of dreams, a routine thing
that bores with expectations of invention, unfiltered
non sequiturs, unusual embraces
only from the practiced
young woman who everyday remembers
being a bride, she is changing behind that white curtain
Leora
fifteen again experiencing
prematurely the pure suckling of a baby
fifteen with a virgin desire for pure suckling
something to do with jasmine
with jasmine tea
existing only without accident
It blooms while Leora sleeps
when she sleeps at night and it is also dark
for the jasmine
four hours
of tea sucking on blossoms, Cestrum nocturnum like
colostrums: the earliest secretions, and then only milk
from mother
—there it is
seven times over
jasmine bath after jasmine bath
till the tea can get no better
highest grade as stasis
all As
gets so boring, ka-put
to the test of innovation
all the right answers
Leora
sees herself mermaid, eel, tiger
fish from waist down
form-fitting skirt of winks
under that bonefish or ladyfish profile: tail fins
already split, caught in transition from legs to fin
hybrid mutant bastard mestizo mulatto masala mule mix mutt
hm/bm/mmmmm
watered down (jasmine bath tea)
spiked (jasmine bath tea)
stands taller on tips of split tail fin
ps: pastiche, salmagundi when all dressed up
Leg and fin share custody
so young men sacrifice only below the belt
to please her
many wounded soldiers
her company
From now on storming the beaches
rocks already aftermath, the breaking of dozens of sphinxes
the taming of sandstone lions and griffins, gargoyles
Leora takes to breast anything capable of sucking
and being filled, no ban on leeches and vipers
that stick out like misplaced overdeveloped hairs
and while in position, her free hand
shaves the heads of Medusa’s children screaming
for more nursing
with her eyes closed, her free handy blade, sharpened
life line
The liquids of history therefore tend to ferment; the beverages for walks down
memory lane therefore become pungent cheeses and wines, the odes
to bitterness and sweetness happen. This is also desirable. Taste depends
on how the glass tilts, how tongue curls.
What’s difficult
is maintaining gaps as gaps. A sustainable nothingness.
But something enters. Sustainable nothingness
looks like a niche.
Ghosts and spirits of what’s been lost. A young woman looks over her shoulder.
Close watching of what’s fading does not mean the change from substance to spirit
would be observed. On the tippy-tips of split tail fin looking over her shoulder
a long line for the nurse, exceptional business, nonstop nursing
and the milk won’t stop, years are at the end of the line.
Pull the plug on a nearby respirator (how on earth?)
        (don’t assume location, location, location)
the substance travels the line
joins the community of electricity, colonies of gigantic storms
on the sun
and appearances in auroras
that the mermaid sits under as under any canopy
nonstop
The spell of the tide tailored to make the one falling under its influence fall more
willingly. It feels nothing like falling at all: Leora describes rehabilitation
Sand sparkles remembering having been alive
only once
Leora’s eyes
sparkle upon contact with crabs and their incredible redness
that ought to teach her something about fire she does not know
with top-heavy ways
of knowing
      (the brain should travel the stations of the body, and one day
       the eyes and navel, when the eyes accompany the brain,
       line up in a row)
                               —then a real reason for revisionDream on 
Accordingly, pureness of the situation milks its own purity
Fantastic and looks disgusting
        (no matter where the eyes are—candidate
         for truth)
but purity is still pure following
such a milking
The mermaid’s pregnancy has to be called immaculate after repeated searches for the
limits. Lost without those. Pure. Last resort and best explanation for birth of a human
baby from a mermaid without a human pelvis or womb. The best xrays
cannot find them. Machines arrive on the beach and leave defective.
Leora
continues nursing
her baby first in line
The milk is pure. It does not need to be pasteurized. Makes                               (empty)
no one ill. Nothing in it allows allergies. The chemistry                                       (empty)
of the milk is pure.                                                                                         (empty)
The molecules of the tabernacle of purity.
              (as if they are empty)                                                                  (nothing is right
                                                                                                                               here)
Law
Flattened out they are like flattened tetrahedrons,
probably are smashed pendulums
now
Leora
blessed
with impossibility of the usual kind of rape
her own brand
jasmine bath after jasmine bath
without legs
she does as much sitting
as anyone who ever sat on a throne
wheelchairs
keep evolving
 
~~~
Disguised in my mouth as a swampland
nailed to my teeth like a rising sun
you come out in the middle of fish-scales
you bleed into gourds wrapped with red ants
you syncopate the air with lungs like screams from yazoo
like X-rated tongues
and nickel-plated fingers of a raw ghost man
and somewhere stripped like a whirlwind
stripped for the shrine room
you sing to me through the side face of a black rooster
In the morning  in the morning  in the morning
all over my door like a rooster
in the morning  in the morning  in the morning
And studded in my kidneys like perforated hiccups
inflamed in my ribs like three hoops of thunder through a screw
a star-bent-bolt of quivering colons
you breathe into veiled rays and scented ice holes
you fire the space like a flare of embalmed pigeons
and palpitate with the worms and venom and wailing flanks
and somewhere inside this fever
inside this patinaed pubic and camouflaged slit
stooped forward on fangs
in rear of your face
you shake to me in the full crown of a black rooster
In the morning  in the morning  in the morning
Masquerading in my horn like a river
eclipsed to infantries of dentures  of diving spears
you enter broken mirrors through fragmented pipe spit
you pull into a shadow ring of magic jelly
you wear the sacrificial blood of nightfall
you lift the ceiling with my tropical slush dance
you slide and tremble with the reputation of an earthquake
and when i kick through walls
to shine like silver
when i shine like brass through crust in a compound
when i shine  shine  shine
you wail to me in the drum call of a black rooster
In the morning  in the morning  in the morning
gonna kill me a rooster
in the morning
early in the morning
way down in the morning
before the sun passes by
in the morning  in the morning  in the morning
In the morning
when the deep sea goes through a dog's bite
and you spit on the tip of your long knife
In the morning in the morning
when peroxide falls on a bed of broken glass
and the sun rises like a polyester ball of menses
in the morning
gonna firedance in the petro
in the morning
turn loose the blues in the funky jungle
in the morning
I said when you see the morning coming like
a two-headed twister
let it blow  let it blow
in the morning  in the morning
all swollen up like an ocean in the morning
early in the morning
before the cream dries in the bushes
in the morning
when you hear the rooster cry
cry rooster cry
in the morning  in the morning
I said
disguised in my mouth like a swampland
nailed to my teeth like a rising sun
you come out in the middle of fish-scales
you bleed into gourds wrapped with red ants
you syncopate the air with lungs like screams from yazoo
like X-rated tongues
and nickel-plated fingers of a raw ghost man
and somewhere stripped like a whirlwind
stripped for the shrine room
you sing to me through the side face of a black rooster
In the morning  in the morning  in the morning
~~~
Someone once asked me, what are the words I do not yet have — ....    ....    ....    
verbs that will story our bodies into something more
than missing, more than squaw or lost, beyond statistics:1 in 3 Native women will be raped in her lifetime.
Daily ritual: my hands search and sift through layers
of tiny earthquakes, shifted verdicts not guilty not enoughevidence not prosecutable not our jurisdiction I dig.Native women are 2.5 times more likely to be sexually assaultedcompared to all other races. I dig. We are vanishing lines in history books, treaties;
laws do not protect us. I dig until mud and earth find home
underneath my fingernails. I’ll plant something new
in the absence burn vanish underreport
Invisible, our ghosts starve, while the rest of the world keeps on eating.A recent government study found that there were 14 federal humantrafficking investigations in Indian Country between 2013 and2016. During that same period the FBI investigated 6,100elsewhere.
Let us poem a place where you cannot erase us into white space.....    ....    ....    
Let us dig to remind ourselves our roots are ancestral
and there is nothing deeper
than these sacred, dirt-covered hands.
~~~
Chile, chocolate, coyote, guacamole, mezcal, peyote,
tomato, ocelot, tequila—the words survive months of siege,
240,000 dead in Tenochtitlan. The Place of Herons,
a place of whiteness, did not survive. Duende, a tiny face
in a calla lily, survived. A bowl decorated with scorpion
and pelican survived. Clay faces full of shadow. Sculptors
who understood light, how it addresses the afterlife,
expecting a great dark to fall.
~~~
I am afraid of your transcendental death.
When people say think of a man. I think of a brown man.
Sometimes the earth grows khella because she can feel our suffering.
Yooooooing beneath Costco tikis.
When people say think of a man. I think of a white man.
I am meant to hold you in your oblique pain, your map-driven pain.
Yooooooing beneath Costco tikis.
I was drunk holding my teeth in like students.
I am meant to hold you in your oblique pain, your map-driven pain.
You die like an actor.
I was drunk holding my teeth in like students.
My body was a brown dog I shoved back into the water.
You die like an actor.
I beseeched but couldn’t stay out of the first person.
My body was a brown dog I shoved back into the water.
Hold me, hold me, hold me, holdmeholdmeholdme.
I beseeched but couldn’t stay out of the first person.
Where does it hurt, we say.
Hold me, hold me, hold me, holdmeholdmeholdme.
I am afraid of your transcendental death.
~~~
The Shannon when it washesthe shoreline in the wakeof a cruiser susurrusesexactly like the Polishlanguage you hear in lidlon Friday evenings, 7 pmpayday. That’s whatGerry says.                           •The river surface offersspace to the song:hammer taps of Latviansand Poles nailing planksof a deck.        The placebetween water and skyholding sound. It is under-loved and an amphitheater.                           •Latvians and Lithuaniansare nailing planksof grooved decking.It will be a nice featureof that riverside property.        Their tap-tappingunderscores the distancebetween this side and that.                           •Winter gales have made swift workof the billboard proclaiming42 luxury bungalows only tworemaining
~~~
you must bemade of money.your parentsmust have grownon trees.bet you’re blacktinged with green.bet you sleepon bags of it.bet your barbiesclimb it.bet you neverwanted.bet you neverhad to ask.bet you golf.bet you tennis.bet you got a summer house.bet you got a credit cardfor your 5th birthday. bet you playedwith bills for toys.bet you chew them up for dinner.bet you spit your black out like tobaccothat’s why you talk sobet you listen to green day.bet you ain’t never heard of al.bet your daddy wears a robearound the house.bet his hands are soft as a frog’s belly.bet your house is on a hill.bet the grass is freshly cut.bet you feel like a princess.bet the police protect your house.bet you know their first names. bet your house has a hundred rooms.bet a black lady comes to clean them.
~~~
We were running out of breath, as we ran out to meet ourselves. We
were surfacing the edge of our ancestors’ fights, and ready to strike.
It was difficult to lose days in the Indian bar if you were straight.
Easy if you played pool and drank to remember to forget. We
made plans to be professional — and did. And some of us could sing
so we drummed a fire-lit pathway up to those starry stars. Sin
was invented by the Christians, as was the Devil, we sang. We
were the heathens, but needed to be saved from them — thin
chance. We knew we were all related in this story, a little gin
will clarify the dark and make us all feel like dancing. We
had something to do with the origins of blues and jazz
I argued with a Pueblo as I filled the jukebox with dimes in June,
forty years later and we still want justice. We are still America. We
know the rumors of our demise. We spit them out. They die
soon.
~~~
The woman in the documentary reaches her hands
to the fence      touches her child through an opening
De mis manos      dolor     When I was a child      my mama
drove me to the swap meet on the other side
for a white dress & flowered wreath      my first
Holy Communion      the mamas nursing
on the roadside     selling chicle con sus
manos libres      Abuelo once rode in the casket
of a trunk      He rose again on our side of the border
which crossed Bisabuela’s family      Look
from my balcony      the sleeping sister
volcanoes shaped like breasts     I’ve
thought about leaving      Shoving
a duffel bag & laptop into the car     taking
the dog      But these babies I’ve wanted since
I was a child      That’s what girls do where I grew up
down the road from a landfill in the humid stench
of a beef plant & sugar beets     hulled & boiled
for their sweet white meat      I found an animal in a trap
who’d fought her way through high grasses
wasting to carcass in my own backyard
& I believe you know what a merciful act means
     I don’t know the words for the shame I’ve carried
The woman in the documentary needs papers
to get back to her children     They’d found her
in the hospital      without insurance      la migra
Mama nursed women who’d run through asparagus fields’
crackling heat      bellies full against the barbed wire
they’re still burying like umbilicals      roots on a battlefield
if the child’s a boy or the place where tortillas are made
for a girl      Don’t you dare say desert
The heat is unbearable & I’ve seen
them pulling anchors from legs
cursing bullet shells      In the hospital facing pig barns
& a graveyard      Mama in her scrubs & gloves
pulling newborns      bloodied like suicide wrists      Jars
of coins for the ferryman & La Virgen burning
an altar on my nightstand      Mis manos      Mis hijos
     Whatever fence I’ve erected from that salted curse
in my family’s blood      Release us
The woman on the screen whispers a prayer      Fly usfree as birds      Sin vergüenza I admit the darkness
I’ve swallowed      the hollow inside      Now      who will
unpin our hands      & toward sky      upraise them
~~~
The students know the agenda. When I step
inside our classroom, the PowerPoint is loaded,
the student presenting her report stands poised
to begin. And so she does. This day is her
second try, the first a wash due to our failed
technology. I ask, Do you think you will earn
another chance each time error is out of your hands?
~~~
   Grandma is washing me white. I am the color of hot sand in the bleached sea light. I am a stain on the porcelain, persistent as tea. Stay in the shade. Don’t say she was the only one. Cousins opposite say: you too white. I am a night-blooming flower being pried open in the morning. My skin a curtain for a cage of bones, a blackbird coop. My heart is crusty bread, hardening. Hardening. This way, I feed my own fluttering. Under shade, the day looks like evening and I cannot bear the darkness. Don’t say, I can’t stand to be touched. Say, I stare into the sun to burn off the soiled hands that print my body with bloody ink. Don’t say, Mulatto. Say, I am the horse in Oz turning different colors, each prance brightening flesh. A curiosity. Don’t say, Bathwater spiraled down into the pipes. Say, I never did fade. Say, Skin holds the perseverance of my days. Folding, folding, the water continuously gathers, making wrinkles in a map.
~~~
For Ruben Ahoueya



Today in America people were bought and sold:
five hundred for a "likely Negro wench."
If someone at auction is worth her weight in gold,
how much would she be worth by pound? By ounce?
If I owned an unimaginable quantity of wealth,
could I buy an iota of myself?
How would I know which part belonged to me?
If I owned part, could I set my part free?
It must be worth something—maybe a lot—
that my great-grandfather, they say, killed a lion.
They say he was black, with muscles as hard as iron,
that he wore a necklace of the claws of the lion he'd fought.
How much do I hear, for his majesty in my blood?
I auction myself. And I make the highest bid.
~~~
        I 
This is a place without a terrain a government that always
          changes an unstable language. Even buildings disappear
          from day to day.
[gendered pronoun] wanders in this place
                                                                       [searching
                                                                                                [waiting
the condition of unbearableness is the constant state of mind
            for all occupants
we read all day in the village square during the rule of [name
          of major historical figure] a book that is so subtle
                                                   [its political content goes unnoticed
what is political content?
                                                          [the question or the statement
[gender pronoun] creates
                                        [a reader culture
                                        [generic plural pronoun] prefer both
                                                      II
realism's authenticities are not the question
the question [role of art in the State
we know art is fundamental to the [New State] as is evidenced
         in village scenes, majestic ancient views, masses and
         masses of [generic human figures] marching in columns,
         swords coded as plowshares, image as spectacle
we kn0w [name of city], [adjective], [name of major composer]
to recode [reduce] it: Linz, ambiguous, Wagner
we know [name of major historical figure] calls, authentically,
         for a more total, more radical war than we can even
         dream in the language of the avant-garde
we know a commercial promises to reduce plaque more
         effectively in this same tone
but sometimes we exceed even our own expectations to
          surprise even ourselves
something encloses the impossible in a fable
an unreal world called real because it is so heavily metaphoric
we can't keep our fingers of connection out of it
 
it is a ride in the country, the car crowded with children
                                                   [each child represents a different
                                                              ethnicity of [name of nation]
it is a moment of standing with light resonating around [major
          historical figure
it is a guiding of the child towards the right path
it is a picnic in a field, the spread is bountiful
[the spread of [name of nation] is represented through the
          arrangement of food on the checkered tablecloth
it is [name of major historical figure]'s Art Collection:
           figure after figure
           each carries spears, lunges, draws the arm back to pull
                   tight the bow
a ruined plaza has a [gendered human form] at its en
        trance
a [generic child] draws a sword under the guidance of
[generic possessive pronoun] [honorific denoting repro-
ductive role]
a [generic human form] raises [generic pronoun] arms and
four horses turn away
another plays a lute
an eagle holds a symbol
fake [name of nation used as an adjective] heads
while the end of lunacy in art was explicit in [name of major
         historical figure]'s rhetoric
while when nation turns to art, art loses its divergence
while the [generic human figures] come back from war, their
         legs in fog
while a [generic human figure] sculpts, small against the
          expanse of marble, giving into the monumental human
          form that symbolizes eugenic possibilities
while another [generic human figure] pedantically draws
          postcards of village centers, operas, mountain vistas
while overwhelmed by an opera [name of major historical 
          figure] plans genocide
                                                    III
we know we respond resistantly as faked children's books of
         realist adventure tales have turned into military instruc-
         tion manuals
or [name of major historical figure] hails a cab, [generic
          possessive human pronoun] hand raised here, beckoning
          as the red flag with [name of fast food chain] waves
          behind [generic human pronoun] and the red star on top  
          of the [name of cultural landmark in major city] twinkles.
many people raise their hands for different purposes all day
         long
we are always waiting for our cab to come
the question here is the same as that of a relationship
where does art define our vocabulary?
the margin declares
[it is impossible to speak about something
it is only possible to speak beside it
                                         
                                          [a film with a voice-over of nonsense
to act in the unsecular forbidden margins [claims a certain
         privilege]
                         [generic human pronoun] cast a colonizing eye
a scripture of space / a place where
a [generic human form] twists in space
                                                               [follow this body]
getting you to recognize yourself in [generic possessive
           pronoun] work
                                                                                    [is kidnapping]
in the space of this question some emigrate or lapse into total
         silence
some co-opt this language and paint a series of meticulous and 
          beautifully colored monumental images of people impris-
          oned and alone at the edge of a tedious despair
some [refigure [refuse] respond] call out for an end
rewritten, the goal of the artist is to prevent reality in a true and
            concrete manner
                                                       IV
[generic human figure] claims I can get more information at
         home than by going to the war scene
what [generic pronoun] sees is [gendered naked bodies] in
          news photos—dead bodies, discarded bodies, junk
 
i  saw  this written on the bottom 
                                                                                 [a way of testimony
the poverty of image among the people of [name of nation]
the continual increase in the amount of image a viewer can
          tolerate
                                                        [who went to [name of nation?
returning again and again to images of torture
covert activities depicted              [blown up
                                                                                   [to show power
                                                              details of photographs
                                                              or Xerox degradations
                                                              of photos on Duraclear
                                                              hang loose are
                                                              vulnerable and
                                                              fragmentary and
                                                              images are seen
                                                              through images and/or
                                                              viewers
[call this]
                the fate of Madame Bovery, the fate of Anna Karenina
A dog with a [generic human face] has slogans coming out 
          of its mouth as angels hold its head back suckle at its
          tits
taped to a [gendered hand, adorned with ring] is a photo-
         graph of [gendered naked torso], gagged
[generic human figure] infects computerized images with
           digitized viruses and then transfers them to canvas with
           a robotic device
                                                   [possible responses to what is seen
in [name of nation] at another time another set of reponses:
a [sexual category withheld] cuts hair and cameras circle
          around and [generic human pronoun] is dragged out of
          the room
another [generic human figure] says passionately we express
          ourselves in a language of regulations. Symbols and
          numbers best convey our ideas
another [generic human figure] makes an enormous painting
           of a massacre victim, mutilated and bloody, and hangs it
           by night on a pedestrian bridge
what a nation gives us is the image in [name of major weekly
          news source] of the [generic human figure] standing
          before the tanks with white flag
[generic pronoun] painted on houses, streets, stones, trees
[generic pronoun] covered [name of island] with strange marks
         in chalk, oil paint, and dye
[generic pronoun] wished to reduce writing to the zero level
         where it is without meaning. When culture invades
         private life on a large scale [generic pronoun] said the
         individual cannot escape being raped
another [generic noun] made a font that was scratched into
         paper by a knife
this font made each letter into a single scratch
[generic pronoun] scratched the other [generic pronoun]'s
         statement on rape into a banner and hung it outside
                                                       [my zero-level writing
                                                       [generic pronoun] said
                                                                           protest rape
                                                       [generic pronoun] said
                                                          my zero-level writing
                                                       [generic pronoun]  said
                                                       dangerous cultural rape
                                                       [generic pronoun]  said
                                                           my zero-level writing
                                                           my zero-level writing
                                                     V
a voice stutters in the background of our waking mind
[generic possessive pronoun] stutter is our stutter
or it is the way we define our difference?
                                                                                  stutter is nation
beneath an image of human figures the words [you have
          nothing to lose but your chains
                                           at times two voices talk to one another
                                                             [generic human] faces [tired]
we know we are all constructed
when it comes down to it we don't believe it
the social always holds us back
while the ways that we encounter relation are various
we remain
searching [searching
we question, respond
                                                              [deny we [move forward
                                  
 
~~~
White-Mexican looks like a Latina,
not my label
a question
from a Guatemalan student
who's come undone
in my ESL class,
doesn't get my kind
I try to describe
how I grew up
in Caucasian corn country
surrounded by houses
on cul-de-sacs
that all looked the same,
how we were alone
in a town of 5000,
one black family,
one Indian family,
one Asian family,
and one household of Mexicans,
no two, us and the Renterias
to whom we were related by marriage
before and after my divorce,
and they were mixed;
still, it was a good living,
happy in our cocooness,
our oneness,
separated by money
one direction
color on the other:
classes, classes, classes,
day and night
we took lessons:
piano, jazz, tap, ballet,
the dance team, trumpet,
trombone, tennis, Finishing School,
and one awful summer golf;
Christened, Confirmed, Cathechismized;
it all cut me in several places,
molding of head and heart
making me ultrasensitive,
then and now,
an observer of the outside,
an outsider among my own kind,
my very shade,
mysterious aloof
black haired beauty
who can't speak Spanish,
living among blue eyed dyed blond bombshells,
who held up her head higher
because she's shy not stuck-up,
understood, undenied, sacrificed to at any price
by my beloved little brown parents
who taught me well
gave up so much
so their daughters could shine
and they'd swell with pride
at the life they had given us,
on Sundays we basked
in mutual admiration after mass
singing our church songs while making breakfast,
according to the unspoken doctrine in our house of:
fast first eat later after communion,
we intruded with our Mexican music
bellowing out the open windows
the smell of bacon frying,
pancakes baking, coffee
and eggs scrambled to order
it wafted out on beautiful summer mornings
out of our house in Pleasant Hill, Iowa,
perched on the highest spot
one could reach on the East Side of the street
for first and second generation immigrants.
 
January 25, 2001
~~~
Muscular as a stallion in fact — 
but I have no horse in this race of people against people.
It was made certain I wouldn’t, that I’d inherit nothing
except a whipping of my hindquarters as a form of correction,
in the cadence of I love you, tar baby, I love you.
This is not unlike how my parents were raised, to comply,
and their parents before them, and theirs before them and so forth
as far back as anyone cared to speak of what they lived
through, the preposterous preposition of it all.
Therefore and thereafter, whenever I hear the word pedigree,
I think of the blank check I don’t have behind my name,
and then I think of saddles and stirrups, and then
the soreness of my lower back, and then the source of that.
How a boss can ride you: of this I am personally familiar,
plus know by blood drawn from two lines of family men
forced to cut out their own tongues to keep food on the table
they could no longer taste or even stand to.
Their tongues grew back, yes, after some time and with
sharpness I’m told, needing to cut against something,
anything, to be purposeful given their new forms.Woe! Woe! Woe! How a man rides his wife, his children,
how he’d ride a horse he’ll never have, could never give them
unless said horse is immaterial, hence not a horse at all — 
just muscular, as a stallion is, as a word is that’s denied
striving families horsepower, any engine beyond their
fragile bodies to propel them forward; the whole race:
forward, even if it pits people against a people,
even if it means rearing a rear end tender and raw.
 
 I love you, tar baby, I love you something strong.
~~~
When I was laughed at for my clumsy English, I touched my throat.
Which said ear when my ear said year and year after year
I pronounced a new thing wrong and other throats laughed.Elevator. Library. Vibrating bells in their mouths.
How to say azalea. How to say forsythia.
Say instead golden bells. Say I’m in ESL. In French class
a boy whose last name is Kring called me belle.
Called me by my Korean name, pronouncing it wrong.
Called it loudly, called attention to my alien.
(I touched the globe moving in my throat, a hemisphere sinking.)
Called me across the field lined with golden bells.
I wanted to run and be loved at the same time. By Kring.
As in ring of people. Where are you going? We’re laughing with you.
The bell in our throat that rings with laughter is called uvula. From uva: grape.
A theory: special to our species, this grape-bell has to do with speech.
Which separates us from animals. Kring looked at me and saidJust curious, do you eat dogs? and I wanted to end my small life.
Be reborn a golden retriever of North America.
Lie on a field lined with golden bells, loved.
Today, in a country where dogs are more cherished
than a foreign child, an Oregon Senate candidate says no
to refugees. Says, years ago, Vietnamese refugees ate dogs,harvested other people’s pets. Harvest as in harvest grapes.Harvest as in harvest a field of golden rice. As do people
from rice countries. As in people-eat-dog worlds.
Years ago, 1923 Japan, the phrase jūgoen gojissen was used
to set apart Koreans: say 15 yen 50 sen. The colonized who used the chaos
of the Kanto Earthquake to poison waters, set fire: a cruelty special to our species.
A cruelty special to our species — how to say jūgo, how to say gojit,
how jūgo sounds like die in Korean, how gojit sounds like lie — lie, lie, library, azalea, library.I’m going to the library, I lied, years ago, on a field lined with forsythia.
~~~
In the early contact period, New England Indian wampum consisted of small tubular-shaped shells drilled and strung as beads.— Alfred A. Cave



The breaking of clouds begins with seizure. A man grabs another, reasons ransom. A murder averted in the thing’s scheme.A cape’s shell transformed, more than one supposed. What stands behind this? Enemy or friend?(Yes, they can be both. Don’t you think I know?) List: Dutch. Indian. Pequot. Puritan.List: Then. War. Event. Now. History. List. The shell buys glories of iron and pelt.Wampum is dismissed. Joke. Sneer. Currency of the disappeared whose children live still.List: Blessing. Curse. Wife. Slave. Savior. Savage. The shells make their noise. The robbed graves cradle.He who brings food to the starving gets cooked.
~~~
I
In the cubbyhole entrance to Cornell and Son,
a woman in a turquoise sweater
curls up to sleep. Her right arm seeks
a cold spot in the stone to release its worry
and her legs stretch
against the middle hinge.
I want to ask her in for coffee,
to tell her go sleep in the extra bed upstairs,
but I’m a guest,
unaccustomed to this place
where homeless people drift along the square
bordering Benjamin Franklin Parkway.
From her portrait on the mantel,
Lucretia Mott asks when
will Americans see
how all forms of oppression blight
the possibilities of a people.
The passion for preserving Independence Square
should reach this nameless woman, settling
in the heavy heat of August,
exposed to the glare of every passerby.
What makes property so private? A fence?
No trespassing signs? Militia ready to die for it
and taxes? Lights in the middle storeys
of office buildings blaze all night above me.
Newspapers don’t explain how wealth
is bound to these broken people.
North of here, things get really rough.
Longshoremen out of work bet on eddies
in the Schuylkill River.
Factories collapse to weed
and ruptured dream. Years ago, Longhouse sachems
rode canoes to Philadelphia,
entering these red brick halls.
They explained how
the law that kept them unified
required a way to share the wealth.
Inside the hearths of these same halls,
such knowledge was obscured,
and plans were laid to push all Indians ,
west. This city born of brotherly love
still turns around this conflict.
Deeper in the dusk,
William Penn must weep
from his perch on top of City Hall.
Our leaders left this woman in the lurch.
How can there be democracy
without the means to live?II
Every fifteen minutes
a patrol car cruises by. I jolt awake
at four a.m. to sirens screeching
and choppers lugging to the hospital heliport
someone who wants to breathe.
The sultry heat leads me
to the window. What matters? This small
square of night sky and two trees
bound by a wide brick wall.
All around, skyscrapers
are telling their stories
under dwindling stars. The girders
remember where Mohawk ironworkers stayed
that day they sat after work
on a balcony, drinking beer.
Below them, a film crew caught
some commercials. In another room above
a mattress caught fire and someone flung it
down into the frame. A woman in blue
sashayed up the street
while a flaming mattress,
falling at the same speed as a flower,
bloomed over her left shoulder.
Every fifteen minutes
a patrol car cruises by. The men inside
mean business. They understood the scene.
A mattress burning in the street
and business deadlocked. Mohawks
drinking beer above it all.
They radioed insurrection,
drew their guns, then three-stepped
up the stairs. Film crews caught the scene,
but it never played. The Mohawks
didn’t guess a swat team had moved in.
When policemen blasted off their door,
the terrified men shoved a table
against the splintered frame.
They fought it out.
One whose name meant Deer got shot
again and again. They let him lie
before they dragged him by his heels
down four flights of stairs. At every step,
he hurdled above his pain
until one final leap
gained him the stars.
The news reported one cop broke his leg.
The film’s been banished to a vault. There are
no plaques. But girders whisper at night
in Philadelphia. They know the boarding house,
but will not say. They know as well what lasts
      and what falls down.III
Passing Doric colonnades of banks
and walls of dark glass,
passing press-the-button-visitors-please
Liberty Townhouses, I turned
up Broad Street near the Hershey Hotel
and headed toward the doorman
outside the Bellevue. Palms and chandeliers inside.
A woman in mauve silk and pearls stepped into the street.
I was tracking my Mohawk grandmother
through time. She left a trace
of her belief somewhere near Locust and Thirteenth.
I didn’t see you, tall, dark, intense,
with three bouquets of flowers in your hand.
On Walnut and Broad, between the Union League
and the Indian Campsite, you stopped me,
shoving flowers toward my arm.
“At least, I’m not begging,” you cried.
The desperation in your voice
spiraled through my feet while I fumbled the few bucks
you asked for. I wanted those flowers—
iris, ageratum, goldenrod and lilies—
because in desperation
you thought of beauty. I recognized
the truth and human love you acted on,
your despair echoing my own.
Forgive me. I should have bought more
of those Philadelphia flowers, passed hand
to hand so quickly, I was stunned a block away.
You had to keep your pride, as I have done,
selling these bouquets of poems
to anyone who’ll take them. After our exchange,
grandmother’s tracks grew clearer.
I returned for days, but you were never there.
If you see her — small, dark, intense,
with a bun of black hair and the gaze of an orphan,
leave a petal in my path.
Then I’ll know I can go on.IV
Some days you get angry enough
to question. There’s a plan out east
with a multitude of charts and diagrams.
They planned to take the timber, the good soil.
Even now, they demolish mountains.
Next they’ll want the water and the air.
I tell you they’re planning to leave our reservations
bare of life. They plan to dump their toxic
wastes on our grandchildren. No one wants to say
how hard they’ve worked a hundred years.
What of you, learning how this continent’s
getting angry? Do you consider what’s in store for you?
~~~
Placa/Rollcall, 1980, by Charles “Chaz” Bojórquez
 


If the city was a body, graffiti would tell us where it hurts.— Charles “Chaz” Bojórquez

 

And this block would shout, “Nos diste un chingaso, cabrón. Mira esta cara rota, these baton-cracked ribs, this black and blue street dizzy con gente: blades, kiki, larry, snow, enrique, connie,  elton, king, david, kelly, jeff, ratón, chaz, los de aquí, los de abajo. This roll call won’t be silenced, not by glock, not by chokehold. This is our temple of runes, our tomb — its glyphic curve and flow, calligraphic code writ acrylic. This, our relic, our scroll unrolled in catacombs, our flecks of subtext still buzzing después de que vayamos con La Pelona. ¡qué lucha, loco! Ven, baile con nosotros to the aerosol’s maraca y hiss, al punk en español’s furious sweat. Hang your head out the window y dale un grito tan lleno de duende that it cracks the pavement, summons our dead to dinner. Turn the tonal kaleidoscope. Then pause, catch your breath, so you don’t miss the illegible moment where all the mystery lives. There, de-cypher that!”
~~~
loaded like spoons
into the belly of Jesus
where we lay for weeks for months
in the sweat and stink
of our own breathing
Jesus
why do you not protect us
chained to the heart of the Angel
where the prayers we never tell
and hot and red
as our bloody ankles
Jesus
Angel
can these be men
who vomit us out from ships
called Jesus    Angel    Grace of God
onto a heathen country
Jesus
Angel
ever again
can this tongue speak
can these bones walk
Grace Of God
can this sin live
~~~
The alcove of your arm
has become my favorite room
for sleep, but I’ve been roused
by nightmares lately. Even thunderstorms
couldn’t wake you
~~~
a.) When I was twelve, I lived
on the grounds of a mental asylum.
 
 
b). My Filipino mother was a psychiatrist,
so that meant we lived
in the doctor’s quarters—
one of the three big brick houses
that edged the institute.
 
 
c). My younger sister and I practiced Herkies—
our favorite cheerleading jumps—
off the patients’ bleachers near the softball field.
 
 
d). When I was twelve, I aced
the experiments
with celery and food coloring;
they let me skip a whole grade
and get right to The Dissections.
 
 
e). I secretly wished my supply
of grape Bubble Yum would never run out
but I couldn’t figure out how to blow bubbles
and snap the lavender gum like Sara could.
 
 
f). We sold gift wrap and crystals
for a junior high fund-raiser and my mom still asksWhere are all the crystals I bought?
andWhy don’t you display them in your house? 
g). When I was twelve, I worried about
the darkening hair on my legs.
My mother bought me my first training bra—
no cup, just little triangle pieces stitched together—
and then a slice of New York-style cheesecake
to bring home.  
h). Home.  
i). When I was twelve, our house
always smelled of fried lumpia
or ginger.
 
 
j). We had zinnias
as wide as my outstretched hand
nodding at us in our garden.
 
 
k). My school had to create
a whole new bus stop
just for my sister and me,
and everyone stopped talking and stared
when we stepped onto the bus each morning,
smelling of grape gum and ginger roots.
 
 
l.) Just who are these girls?
~~~
In the autumn I moved to New York,
I recognized her face all over the subway
stations—pearls around her throat, she poses
for her immigration papers. In 1924, the only
Americans required to carry identity cards
were ethnically Chinese—the first photo IDs,
red targets on the head of every man, woman,
child, infant, movie star. Like pallbearers,
they lined up to get their pictures taken: full-face
view, direct camera gaze, no smiles, ears showing,
in silver gelatin. A rogue’s gallery of Chinese
exclusion. The subway poster doesn’t name
her—though it does mention her ethnicity,
and the name of the New-York Historical
Society exhibition: Exclusion/Inclusion.
Soon, when I felt alone in this city, her face
would peer at me from behind seats, turnstiles,
heads, and headphones, and I swear she wore
a smile only I could see. Sometimes my face
aligned with hers, and we would rush past
the bewildered lives before us—hers, gone
the year my mother was born, and mine,
a belt of ghosts trailing after my scent.
In the same aboveground train, in the same
city where slain umbrellas travel across
the Hudson River, we live and live.
I’ve left my landline so ghosts can’t dial me
at midnight with the hunger of hunters
anymore. I’m so hungry I gnaw at light.
It tunnels from the shadows, an exhausting
hope. I know this hunger tormented her too.
It haunted her through her years in L.A., Paris,
and New York, the parties she went to, people
she met—Paul Robeson, Zora Neale Hurston,
Langston Hughes, Gertrude Stein. It haunts
her expression still, on the 6 train, Grand
Central station, an echo chamber behind
her eyes. But dear universe: if I can recognize
her face under this tunnel of endless shadows
against the luminance of all that is extinct
and oncoming, then I am not a stranger here.
 
~~~
Snow White was nude at her wedding, she’s so white
the gown seemed to disappear when she put it on.
 
Put me beside her and the proximity is good
for a study of chiaroscuro, not much else.
 
Her name aggravates me most, as if I need to be told
what’s white and what isn’t.
 
Judging strictly by appearance there’s a future for me
forever at her heels, a shadow’s constant worship.
 
Is it fair for me to live that way, unable
to get off the ground?
 
Turning the tables isn’t fair unless they keep turning.
Then there’s the danger of Russian roulette
 
and my disadvantage: nothing falls from the sky
to name me.
 
I am the empty space where the tooth was, that my tongue
rushes to fill because I can’t stand vacancies.
 
And it’s not enough. The penis just fills another
gap. And it’s not enough.
 
When you look at me,
know that more than white is missing.
 
~~~
The first Technicolor feature in Hollywood, a retelling of  Madame Butterfly,  starring Anna May Wong



green means go, so run — now — green the color of the siren sea, whose favors are a mortgage upon the soul
~~~
To be a disco ball dangling in a storefront window, in the sun, with a cage on  it. To be two and three disco balls, downtown McAllen, spangles of sun and  water that grew tangerine skins late February, pink bottlebrush nostrils, buff-bellied hummingbirds. To be mirrors and hexagonal combs, mexican honey  wasps, larvae, paper, wax. To make geometry without vocabulary, to be live  music—take off your jacket, girl, wear your tank top . . . it's ninety degrees! To be a green light go, downtown Corpus, after cars and trucks zooming on beach  sand, before hot tubs. To be an orange sun driving from Anzaldúa's grave, to  be a cactus bloom fuchsia, opuntia, Laguna Atascosa, Laguna Madre, to be a  watering hole, a mud chimney air vent for crawdad water tunnels. To be a silver lizard run over by tires, a swatch of river on asphalt, to be a bolt loosened from  the border wall, to be a peso falling out of the border crossing's revolving slot,  to be a coke-bottle dove, a mexican coca-cola, a cooing quorum of lotería cards  signing a resolution. To be a goose perched on top of an abandoned sink in a yard, in a town that fords the river, to be the woman stretched on her beloved's grave, returned after decades. To be a kid in juvie, to be her guardian, the judge,  the p.o., to be the letters she writes, the words that matter more than food, almost as much as music and more than makeup, nearly suns seen through the mandatory skylight, imagined by the control room monitor. To be el chalán, the last hand-drawn ferry on the river, its ropes pulled by pilots, to be a passenger  almost on the other side.
~~~
what she told me. What I honor. They, as unambiguous as Lyrae is:
black, bard, badass; svelte with flourishing braids; a singularity and
somehow all of them gathered as one like tributaries to the mouth of
the river of God—Gwendolyn and Lucille and June and—and I can’t
count all the ways I was saved that day, emerging wet from the ritual
to find myself sitting in some stranger’s living room, a writer who’d
been pushed out of their homeland by its persecutions, pulled into
America on the promise of asylum, the same America that commits
my own kind to institutions with routine and rarely second thoughts
signaling the presence of conscience, and while we’re on the subject
of right and wrong, know I’d read the news recently and retreated far
into my unfeeling before I received the blessing of her timely word,
walking in bloody boots through hallways leading to the chambers
where tenderness is said to rest in all of us by symbology, but then
I was called outside my bones again. And let me tell you, my friend:
you’ve never seen light before you’ve seen it. I swear, it’s as if with
the snap of a finger I could recite the very definition of gold without
needing to run yolk from the promise of a child, a happy day’s glow
spilling into the street like July’s laughter from a fire hydrant as we
left the house with folk who loved words and loved us—loved us—
so expansively. And less than two nights later we’re all throwing our
asses in a circle, cuttin’ up, working up what was an effortless sweat,
undeterred even as the music skipped on every hiccup of the fraying
wires, tethered just as strenuously to joy as ever, like always, trying
to catch a good breath, but I paid it no mind, no mind, no mind—no,
I wasn’t absent upstairs exactly, I was hyper-present; what a ghost is
to death I was to life, inside everything simultaneously—the sub and
the synth, the blown-off roof and hole-stomped floor, the rise of
their chests and the fall—and only nigga returned me to this plane:my nigga, my nigga, a lyric left on my bottom lip like the sweet after-
burn of Hennessy, but yo, it’s like I was being called for, called out
of need since I know that word only has such resonance in a world
where we ain’t free. And, nah, we ain’t free, if you were wondering.
There are no shackles on me your eyes can see but none that I can’t
feel as if they were appendages divided from me by the occurrence
of civil war, a set of chimeless chains that could be yanked on and
bring me, even at my most upright, to my knees. And if it happens—
again—I suppose I could pray, there, at my literally lowest moment,
immersed in the mess they’ve made that I’m tasked with cleaning
up for the commendation of pennies. I hope I don’t get shot while
genuflect since that’s apparently a thing now in this country, but I
worry such a selfish ask won’t have sufficient fuel to reach heaven,
that the bastardized sparrow will burn up in the atmosphere as easily
as tissue paper. And I recognize I’m rambling now, but I’m likewise
increasing my odds of bumping into the point of all this since inside
the milk of me something was stirred by what she said, but it’s hard
to translate a muscular language to a verbal one just as it’s hard to
relate to folk who don’t consider their own demise fifty ’leven times
a day at least, and for that relapse not to be an injurious ideation but
an itch of practicality. What I wouldn’t pay for the chance to not pay
attention to every little thing—how they talk near me and how they
talk when they believe I’m nowhere near, what they do or don’t do
with each other that they do or don’t do with me, the questions they
feel quite content to ask me and the ones they never seem to though
I leave the door open, the window, the bleeding heart. I know them
so well, people who wouldn’t know me from the next in the lineup;
I know them so intimately you’d think I love them all, and the gag is
that I do, by some undesired miracle, and that is part of all this, too.
To say they don’t deserve my time is an obvious statement, but they
take it anyway because it’s all they know, evident as I recount every
transgression taking seconds off my time on this earth, summing up
to years, almost to the point I’m gone already, in response to which
I either swallow spit or spit out ellipses. Ask the wounded wall what
I know of restraint, the manifesto I’d pen with what pours out from
my punctured knuckles, though, perhaps, the poet was signaling that,
all along, I’ve been teaching the most important life lesson merely by
domesticating rage, confining it inside the margins of the flesh that
my parents made for me, the page my life is written against each day
in corrective red ink. And this seems like the appropriate moment
to divulge that her sermon came during a dialogue about poetic craft
of all things, but if poetry can’t be applied to how one moves through
this world then I see very little worth in it, which is where it started
for me. Poetry was a dead white thing in my life once, at the bottom
of the trash can with the doll of Jesus they’d tried pawning off on me
back in Catholic school, but luckily I already knew one for us, by us,
and thus found the inner-strength to soldier through the barren winter
of lyrical delight rocking a pair of big-ass Timberlands and other on-
trend threads a person of greater gravitas could’ve filled out better
around the shoulders. But I digress—since what I really mean to be
speaking on is how the Cavalier poets weren’t really doing it for me
during high school, not because their explicit sexuality or their taste
for material excess and ambitious proximity to the throne were such
disagreeable subjects to me, at the time revisiting rap’s mafioso era,
but because when we painted those same pictures as we preferred to,
our tongues spiraling like ballerinas and bullets, they sought the ban
on sale or talked down on it as being absent of any artistic merit, as if
a nation’s worth of people surviving subjugation is more science than
art anyway, for if that were true, then we wouldn’t have a culture and
America wouldn’t have great product to push to the rest of the planet
aside from all the bombs it seems much keener on dropping casually
like Funkmaster Flex, and I’d already grown tired in my young age,
so tired, of trying to prove I’m not stupid even above trying to prove
I’m smart. And those who doubt there’s a difference have digging
to do, deep into their pockets to get me what I’m owed for damages,
for emotional distress and all things it’s been made feasible to sue for
with solid legal representation. Funny, I once longed to be a lawyer,
little fool that I was, my back against a brick wall painted by spotlight,
rifles lined and aiming, in that night’s vision—legal fluency seemed
the only option for release from this burden because it’s the language
my nemeses speak in. I do know bad English from black, but I know
power even better because I’ve brushed up against it just as a person
in any number of neighborhoods around here may have brushed up
against a police officer. Maybe it’s needless to say I didn’t go down
an attorney path; I actually don’t have a plan at all these days except
evading the bullet and also the bullet points corporations thrive on,
as if any of this is simple, as if I, symptom of systemic dysfunctions
enveloped by skeleton and skin, am something simple. I’d only ever
be two-dimensional if airbrushed on a blank T-shirt and even that
would show depth to someone’s esteem for who I was with no one
else nearby, and all this means is that there is more to me or anyone
alike than being menace or miscreant, minstrel or misanthrope, or
murdered as all four would be with equal fanfare. But what I really
want is to know what they feel when their black friend dies in that
typical way for it’s maybe the only thing I don’t know about them,
while we practice poker faces and draft FAQs. Forget seeing eye to
eye for a second. Set aside the particular grammars of forgiveness
we use without pulling up the problem’s root: do they still feel full
people if they put the hammer down? And when they can’t answer,
make note that I can because I have those tools and also others that
shall remain nameless in order to remain purposeful. That’s how I
prefer it, besting all desertions of their decency, which I say since
you’ve caught me rare and raw tonight, sipping off the bottle top,
slurring my songs, hitting my two-step on beat every. single. time.
Damn—how blessed they are to be able to watch me work around
them—as illegibly as what the miraculous Phillis Wheatley wrote
all over her master’s walls, owned in the moment, I feel, solely by
an ambition toward self-definition I also try applying prodigiously,
bringing them to speechlessness, a shaming kind of silence sayinglisten, leave me be because there’s no explaining me, thus there’s
no exploiting me: what only a history under thumb and foot helps
grasp before letting go, for one’s own good even more than mine.
~~~
 Larry Levan (snake), 2006, by Elia Alba 
Hip hip hip hip hip makes the man
as the conga, serpentine, slides across the frame 
and the disco dub — tilt and sway — 
sewing pelves in the room, as if  Larry, still, 
were levitating streetwise
Blacks, Drags, Latinos, Punks: Saturday Mass, 1985, 
in the Paradise Garage — Evelyn
“Champagne” King, Kraftwerk, Ashra. 
No. He’s black-and-white, a head shot,
one two three four five, 
on this S curve of 21st-century revelers,
mask on the one body down, 
shimmer slant of a hoop earring
under the ten-leg- hop-and-pulsate —  
glide on through. And Larry, Dour Father,
bubble pop-popped, afloat, 
asking repeatedly: Who, My Friends, is fronting? Who is not?  You, Velvet Valance, over the sequined  drag of curtain. Black is Black,  Brown is Brown, Gay is Gay disco  pulsing up and through seventeen years of not-forbidding bodies. Introibo

ad altare Dei. Ad Deum qui lætificat 
juventutem meam. Gather you  to me and to one another. Grind.
~~~
The Indiscriminate Citizenry of Earth are out to arrest my sense of being a misfit. “Open up!” they bellow, hands quiet before my door that’s only wind and juniper needles, anyway.  You can’t do it, I squeak from inside. You can’t make me feel at home here in this time of siege for me and mine, mi raza. Legalized suspicion of my legitimacy is now a permanent resident in my gut.  “Fruit of the prickly pear!” they swear, striding up to my table to juice me a glass of pink nectar. They’ve brought welcome baskets stuffed with proof I’m earthling.  From under a gingham cover, I tug a dark feather iridescing green — cohering to “magpie” thought, to memory’s chatter, to mind. Mine.  And here they have my mind translated into a slate-surfaced pond, which vibrates in the shape of a cottonwood’s autumn molt, which trees me to dirt, which soils me heat & freeze —  But you’ll always be one definitive document short! I complain. Doubts can forever outstrip your geo-logic.  For which they produce a lock of my natal dust, bronzed to the fluttering fiber of lacebark pine.  Where’d they get that stuff?  The baskets are bottomless, and it’s useless for me to insist on being distinct. Undergoing re-portation, I’m awakened to a Center,  where walls between all beings are dreamt to dissolve.
~~~
                    I drew solitude over me, on the long shore.
                                        —Robinson Jeffers, “Prelude”  

          For whoever does not afflict his soul through this day, shall be
          cut off from his people.
                                                                           —Leviticus 23:29




What is a Jew in solitude?
What would it mean not to feel lonely or afraid
far from your own or those you have called your own?
What is a woman in solitude:   a queer woman or man?
In the empty street, on the empty beach, in the desert
what in this world as it is can solitude mean?
 
The glassy, concrete octagon suspended from the cliffs
with its electric gate, its perfected privacy
is not what I mean
the pick-up with a gun parked at a turn-out in Utah or the Golan Heights
is not what I mean
the poet’s tower facing the western ocean, acres of forest planted to the east, the woman reading in the cabin, her attack dog suddenly risen
is not what I mean
 
Three thousand miles from what I once called home
I open a book searching for some lines I remember
about flowers, something to bind me to this coast as lilacs in the dooryard once
bound me back there—yes, lupines on a burnt mountainside,
something that bloomed and faded and was written down
in the poet’s book, forever:
Opening the poet’s book
I find the hatred in the poet’s heart: . . . the hateful-eyedand human-bodied are all about me: you that love multitude may have them
 
Robinson Jeffers, multitude
is the blur flung by distinct forms against these landward valleys
and the farms that run down to the sea; the lupines
are multitude, and the torched poppies, the grey Pacific unrolling its scrolls of surf,
and the separate persons, stooped
over sewing machines in denim dust, bent under the shattering skies of harvest
who sleep by shifts in never-empty beds have their various dreams
Hands that pick, pack, steam, stitch, strip, stuff, shell, scrape, scour, belong to a brain like no other
Must I argue the love of multitude in the blur or defend
a solitude of barbed-wire and searchlights, the survivalist’s final solution, have I a choice?
 
To wonder far from your own or those you have called your own
to hear strangeness calling you from far away
and walk in that direction, long and far, not calculating risk
to go to meet the Stranger without fear or weapon, protection nowhere on your mind
(the Jew on the icy, rutted road on Christmas Eve prays for another Jew
the woman in the ungainly twisting shadows of the street:   Make those be a woman’s footsteps; as if she could believe in a woman’s god)
 
Find someone like yourself.   Find others.
Agree you will never desert each other.
Understand that any rift among you
means power to those who want to do you in.
Close to the center, safety; toward the edges, danger.
But I have a nightmare to tell:   I am trying to say
that to be with my people is my dearest wish
but that I also love strangers
that I crave separateness
I hear myself stuttering these words
to my worst friends and my best enemies
who watch for my mistakes in grammar
my mistakes in love.
This is the day of atonement; but do my people forgive me?
If a cloud knew loneliness and fear, I would be that cloud.
 
To love the Stranger, to love solitude—am I writing merely about privilege
about drifting from the center, drawn to edges,
a privilege we can’t afford in the world that is,
who are hated as being of our kind: faggot kicked into the icy river, woman dragged from her stalled car
into the mist-struck mountains, used and hacked to death
young scholar shot at the university gates on a summer evening walk, his prizes and studies nothing, nothing availing his Blackness
Jew deluded that she’s escaped the tribe, the laws of her exclusion, the men too holy to touch her hand;   Jew who has turned her back
on midrash and mitzvah (yet wears the chai on a thong between her breasts) hiking alone
found with a swastika carved in her back at the foot of the cliffs (did she die as queer or as Jew?)
 
Solitude, O taboo, endangered species
on the mist-struck spur of the mountain, I want a gun to defend you
In the desert, on the deserted street, I want what I can’t have:
your elder sister, Justice, her great peasant’s hand outspread
her eye, half-hooded, sharp and true 
 
And I ask myself, have I thrown courage away?
have I traded off something I don’t name?
To what extreme will I go to meet the extremist?
What will I do to defend my want or anyone’s want to search for her spirit-vision
far from the protection of those she has called her own?
Will I find O solitude
your plumes, your breasts, your hair
against my face, as in childhood, your voice like the mockingbird’s
singing Yes, you are loved, why else this song?
in the old places, anywhere?
 
What is a Jew in solitude?
What is a woman in solitude, a queer woman or man?
When the winter flood-tides wrench the tower from the rock, crumble the prophet’s headland, and the farms slide into the sea
when leviathan is endangered and Jonah becomes revenger
when center and edges are crushed together, the extremities crushed together on which the world was founded
when our souls crash together, Arab and Jew, howling our loneliness within the tribes
when the refugee child and the exile’s child re-open the blasted and forbidden city
when we who refuse to be women and men as women and men are chartered, tell our stories of solitude spent in multitude
in that world as it may be, newborn and haunted, what will solitude mean?
 
1984-1985
~~~
Bastard, the other boys teased him,till Phaethon unleashed the steeds of Armageddon. He couldn’t hold their reins. Driving the sun too close to earth, the boy withered rivers, torched Eucalyptus groves, until the hills burst into flame, and the people’s blood boiled through the skin. Ethiopia,land of   burnt faces. In a boy’s rage for a name, the myth of race begins.
~~~
Gauley Bridge is a good town for Negroes, they let us stand around, they let us stand
around on the sidewalks if we’re black or brown.
Vanetta’s over the trestle, and that’s our town.
The hill makes breathing slow, slow breathing after your row the river,
and the graveyard’s on the hill, cold in the springtime blow,
the graveyard’s up on high, and the town is down below.
Did you ever bury thirty-five men in a place in back of your house,
thirty-five tunnel workers the doctors didn’t attend,
died in the tunnel camps, under rocks, everywhere, world without end.
When a man said I feel poorly, for any reason, any weakness or such,
letting up when he couldn’t keep going barely,
the Cap and company come and run him off the job surely.
I’ve put them
DOWN from the tunnel camps
to the graveyard on the hill,
tin-cans all about—it fixed them!—
TUNNELITIS
hold themselves up
at the side of a tree,
I can go right now
to that cemetery.
When the blast went off the boss would call out, Come, let’s go back,
when that heavy loaded blast went white, Come, let’s go back,
telling us hurry, hurry, into the falling rocks and muck.
The water they would bring had dust in it, our drinking water,
the camps and their groves were colored with the dust,
we cleaned our clothes in the groves, but we always had the dust.
Looked like somebody sprinkled flour all over the parks and groves,
it stayed and the rain couldn’t wash it away and it twinkled
that white dust really looked pretty down around our ankles.
As dark as I am, when I came out at morning after the tunnel at night,
with a white man, nobody could have told which man was white.
The dust had covered us both, and the dust was white.
~~~
By way of my mother, the deacon with the slick gray hair and money
clip in his pocket can claim a percentage of my body like tithe rights.
And on this Sunday, as with every other Sunday, he is a slender
ebony panel in the fence of faith, one man in the company of men
standing shoulder to shoulder in suits, tapping their toes, clapping
their hands, putting muscle to work in the making of praise music.
We Baptists call this devotion, my working definition of which
is faithfulness to the light. To the extent that God is as white
as the clouds of heaven, this theory holds. To the extent these
particular men are dark, I must consider other possibilities:
that God remade himself in my image so that we could be closer
or that devotion means the commitment of black men to stand
with one another
~~~
for j. byrd



i am a man's head hunched in the road.
i was chosen to speak by the members
of my body. the arm as it pulled away
pointed toward me, the hand opened once
and was gone.
why and why and why
should i call a white man brother?
who is the human in this place,
the thing that is dragged or the dragger?
what does my daughter say?
the sun is a blister overhead.
if i were alive i could not bear it.
the townsfolk sing we shall overcome
while hope bleeds slowly from my mouth
into the dirt that covers us all.
i am done with this dust. i am done.
~~~
i. the old marrieds
But why the moon rose so cruelly, neither of them would say.
Though a listless jazz buzzed obediently beneath their day,
and he had seen the hand-in-hands dotting the dim streets.
And she had heard the morning skillet scorch its Mississippi sweets,
its globs of fat. Now, time to be closer — here, on the verge of May.
But why the moon drooped so cruelly, neither ventured to say.ii. kitchenette building
We are soft-caged behind streaked windows, our someday plans
grayed and siphoned flat. “Faith” is simply a church sound, not strong
like “factory,” “scrubbing the chitlins,” or “keeping that man.”
But could faith be a blatant gold blasting through dinner’s fatty fumes,
its perfumed lure tangling with the smell of twice-fried potatoes
and twist-tied bags of reeking rubbish lining the dark hall?
Fluttering beneath florescent sputter, could faith warm our rooms,
even the walls scrubbed raw with Baptist chill? If we let faith in,
had the mind to carve it a space, keep it Sunday clean,
anticipate its slow glories, beg it to begin?
We can’t spare the time faith needs. We don’t have that minute.
Since silly wants like hot water require we be practical now,
we wait and wait on the bathroom, hope the warm stays in it.iii. the mother
Murders will not let you forget.
You remember the children you had — suddenly quarry, target —
the daughters with gunfire smoldering circles in their napped hair,
the absent sons whose screams still ride the air.
You knew the ways of bullets, prayed your child run, outrun, beat
them in their race toward the heart of your baby, your sweet.
You imagine another child cocking the hammer with his thumb,
or blazing the blade forward, harkening the dark that will overcome
you. Never again will you look at a bright, upturned face and sigh,
returning again and again to drown your baby in the mama-eye.
I hear on Kilbourn, on Christiana, the not-there of my children.
I have pushed them flail and wriggle from my tired body, eased
my babies into a world of growl and gun. The breath-suck,
I wailed and prayed, my loves, as rougher mothers seized
you. Now I am newly barren, drained of mother luck,
and you are suddenly far beyond my futile reach.
If I let these frantic streets deny the tender in your names,
if I relinquished you to this city and its unrelenting games,
your end is all I own. If I dared let others govern your deaths,
if I wasn’t there to mourn your final blurring breaths,
believe that my loss of you to this was not deliberate.
Though I have no right to whine,
whine that none of the blame was mine,
since, in every world I’m rooted in, you are dead.
Or rather, or instead,
you are so much a hollow of the children I made.
But now you are scar on the pavement. I am afraid —
is that the you there is now, how the story of you will be said?
You were born — a gunshot, a swift blade — then you died.
It’s too much this way — even the child who killed you cried.
Believe. I loved you all.
Be. Leave me the sounds of still-thudding hearts. I grieve you
All.iv. a song in the back yard
I’ve wallowed in the back yard all my life.
I want to slide ’round front
Where it’s gold-splashed and guarded and spined fragrance grows.
A girl gets a craving for rose.
I want to go in the front yard now
and far away from these nappy weeds — this alley
too. I wanna see where the well-off children play.
I want some proper fun today.
They do some miracle things.
They have that secret kinda fun.
My daddy says They’re uppity, but I think it’s fine
how they’re tucked in their beds by a quarter to nine.
My mama, with her country ways, try as she may,
will never turn me into a weeds and wildflowers woman,
that’s a fact. I only stay up late
on account of all her party folk flooding our back gate.
But that’s OK. I think front yard folk are perfect. Really, I do.
And I’m gonna be a righteous woman, too.
And wear a soft cardigan, cashmere trimmed in lace.
And stroll ’round all of Lawndale with this righteous on my face.
~~~
for Desiray Kierra Chee



In the last days of the fourth world I wished to make a map for
those who would climb through the hole in the sky.
My only tools were the desires of humans as they emerged
from the killing fields, from the bedrooms and the kitchens.
For the soul is a wanderer with many hands and feet.
The map must be of sand and can’t be read by ordinary light. It
must carry fire to the next tribal town, for renewal of spirit.
In the legend are instructions on the language of the land, how it
was we forgot to acknowledge the gift, as if we were not in it or of it.
Take note of the proliferation of supermarkets and malls, the
altars of money. They best describe the detour from grace.
Keep track of the errors of our forgetfulness; the fog steals our
children while we sleep.
Flowers of rage spring up in the depression. Monsters are born
there of nuclear anger.
Trees of ashes wave good-bye to good-bye and the map appears to
disappear.
We no longer know the names of the birds here, how to speak to
them by their personal names.
Once we knew everything in this lush promise.
What I am telling you is real and is printed in a warning on the
map. Our forgetfulness stalks us, walks the earth behind us, leav-
ing a trail of paper diapers, needles, and wasted blood.
An imperfect map will have to do, little one.
The place of entry is the sea of your mother’s blood, your father’s
small death as he longs to know himself in another.
There is no exit.
The map can be interpreted through the wall of the intestine—a
spiral on the road of knowledge.
You will travel through the membrane of death, smell cooking
from the encampment where our relatives make a feast of fresh
deer meat and corn soup, in the Milky Way.
They have never left us; we abandoned them for science.
And when you take your next breath as we enter the fifth world
there will be no X, no guidebook with words you can carry.
You will have to navigate by your mother’s voice, renew the song
she is singing.
Fresh courage glimmers from planets.
And lights the map printed with the blood of history, a map you
will have to know by your intention, by the language of suns.
When you emerge note the tracks of the monster slayers where they
entered the cities of artificial light and killed what was killing us.
You will see red cliffs. They are the heart, contain the ladder.
A white deer will greet you when the last human climbs from the
destruction.
Remember the hole of shame marking the act of abandoning our
tribal grounds.
We were never perfect.
Yet, the journey we make together is perfect on this earth who was
once a star and made the same mistakes as humans.
We might make them again, she said.
Crucial to finding the way is this: there is no beginning or end.
You must make your own map.
~~~
November 2015
                         1
Open up for close
out    soul-clothes    every-
thing has to go    closing
down time    call them all
saints    souls    my own gone
ones:  Andy    Marcia    Mary Alice
Mary Anne     cloud of all    carried out
 
2 
outside my window: locust, cloth
of gold     on the ground: its yellow
tabs   linden hearts   sweetgum stars
like cut-outs from the same ...    
paper-napkin ghosts in a tree near
the house where a year ago my friend — 
rust-colored chrysanthemums   rust-colored door
 
3 
door to door the angel no the Lord
passed or did not pass — 
the angel opened the prison
door     doors to pass through, out
or in:  our millions, more than any — 
in the other story the Lord
said:  to put a difference between
 
4 
between one and another
a gun:  at one end it’s a good
gun because at the other’s a cell
phone pill bottle toy gun nothing a
Trayvon    Tamir    Dontre    Michael
Laquan    Eric    Rekia    John:    call
them out and the others, black and many
 
5 many thousand gone    no
more auction block
~~~
That day in December I sat down
by Miss Muffet of Montgomery.
I was myriad-weary. Feets swole
from sewing seams on a filthy fabric;
tired-sore a pedalin’ the rusty Singer; 
dingy cotton thread jammed in the eye.
All lifelong I’d slide through century-reams
loathsome with tears. Dreaming my own
silk-self. 
It was not like they all say. Miss Liberty Muffet
she didn’t
jump at the sight of me.
Not exactly.
They hauled me
away—a thousand kicking legs pinned down. 
The rest of me I tell you—a cloud.
Beautiful trouble on the dead December
horizon. Come to sit in judgment. 
How many miles as the Jim Crow flies?
Over oceans and some. I rumbled.
They couldn’t hold me down. Long.
No. 
My feets were tired. My eyes were
sore. My heart was raw from hemming
dirty edges of Miss L. Muffet’s garment.
I rode again. 
A thousand bloody miles after the Crow flies
that day in December long remembered when I sat down
beside Miss Muffet of Montgomery.
I said—like the joke say—What’s in the bowl, Thief?
I said—That’s your curse.
I said—This my way.
She slipped her frock, disembarked,
settled in the suburbs, deaf, mute, lewd, and blind.
The bowl she left behind. The empty bowl mine.
The spoiled dress. 
Jim Crow dies and ravens come with crumbs.
They say—Eat and be satisfied.
I fast and pray and ride.
~~~
On the way home,
Klansmen handed out pamphlets on the corner.
At the convenience store, taxidermied alligator heads framed
red red lips, black black skin, white wild white wide eyes, and teeth grinning (gritting).
Mammy, Sambo, savages and jockeys shaped
cookie jars, figurines, gravy boats, piggy banks, and salt and pepper shakers.
I hold evidence in the shape of entrails, two scales
stuck to the side of the sink. Bodies
decapitated and soaked
in milk and butter. Breaded in crumbs. Tender,
the results of freeing the little ones.
Mount that big one there.
I have lived with the reduction of noise and the number of warnings.
I have lived under July’s blankets and February’s ill-fitting sleeves.
I have lived with the proof of the Susquehanna’s existence,
in the shadow of the shadow of the outline of a bubble’s refracted edge.
~~~
Highlight Actions
Enable or disable annotations




won't you celebrate with me
what i have shaped into
a kind of life? i had no model.
born in babylonbabylon Once a great city in Biblical times, see Psalms 137.
both nonwhite and woman
what did i see to be except myself?
i made it up
here on this bridge betweenbetween / starshine and clay Compare to John Keats’s “betwixt damnation and impassion’d clay” in “On Sitting Down to Read King Lear Once Again.” starshine and clay,between / starshine and clay Compare to John Keats’s “betwixt damnation and impassion’d clay” in “On Sitting Down to Read King Lear Once Again.” 
my one hand holding tight
my other hand; come celebrate
with me that everyday
something has tried to kill me
and has failed.
~~~
In the portrait of Jefferson that hangs
        at Monticello, he is rendered two-toned:
his forehead white with illumination —
a lit bulb — the rest of his face in shadow,
        darkened as if the artist meant to contrast
his bright knowledge, its dark subtext.
By 1805, when Jefferson sat for the portrait,
        he was already linked to an affair
with his slave. Against a backdrop, blue
and ethereal, a wash of paint that seems
        to hold him in relief, Jefferson gazes out
across the centuries, his lips fixed as if
he's just uttered some final word.
        The first time I saw the painting, I listened
as my father explained the contradictions:
 
how Jefferson hated slavery, though — out 
        of necessity, my father said — had to own
slaves; that his moral philosophy meant
 
he could not have fathered those children:
        would have been impossible, my father said.
For years we debated the distance between
word and deed. I'd follow my father from book
        to book, gathering citations, listening
as he named — like a field guide to Virginia —
each flower and tree and bird as if to prove
        a man's pursuit of knowledge is greater
than his shortcomings, the limits of his vision.
I did not know then the subtext
        of our story, that my father could imagine
Jefferson's words made flesh in my flesh —
 the improvement of the blacks in body
        and mind, in the first instance of their mixture
with the whites 
~~~
For Pat Gourneau, my grandfather



The heron makes a cross
flying low over the marsh.
Its heart is an old compass
pointing off in four directions.
It drags the world along,
the world it becomes.
My face surfaces in the green
beveled glass above the washstand.
My handprint in thick black powder
on the bedroom shade.
Home I could drink like thin fire
that gathers
like lead in my veins,
heart’s armor, the coffee stains.
In the dust of the double hollyhock,
Theresa, one frail flame eating wind.
One slim candle
that snaps in the dry grass.
Ascending tall ladders
that walk to the edge of dusk.
Riding a blue cricket
through the tumult of the falling dawn.
At dusk the gray owl walks the length of the roof,
sharpening its talons on the shingles.
Grandpa leans back
between spoonfuls of canned soup
and repeats to himself a word
that belongs to a world
no one else can remember.
The day has not come
when from sloughs, the great salamander
lumbers through snow, salt, and fire
to be with him, throws the hatchet
of its head through the door of the three-room house
and eats the blue roses that are peeling off the walls.
Uncle Ray, drunk for three days
behind the jagged window
of a new government box,
drapes himself in fallen curtains, and dreams that the odd
beast seen near Cannonball, North Dakota,
crouches moaning at the door to his body. The latch
is the small hook and eye.
of religion. Twenty nuns
fall through clouds to park their butts
on the metal hasp. Surely that
would be considered miraculous almost anyplace,
but here in the Turtle Mountains
it is no more than common fact.
Raymond wakes,
but he can’t shrug them off. He is looking up
dark tunnels of their sleeves,
and into their frozen armpits,
or is it heaven? He counts the points
of their hairs like stars.
One by one they blink out,
and Theresa comes forth
clothed in the lovely hair
she has been washing all day. She smells
like a hayfield, drifting pollen
of birch trees.
Her hair steals across her shoulders
like a postcard sunset.
All the boys tonight, goaded from below,
will approach her in The Blazer, The Tomahawk,
The White Roach Bar where everyone
gets up to cut the rug, wagging everything they got,
as the one bass drum of The Holy Greaseballs
lights a depth
charge through the smoke.
Grandpa leans closer to the bingo.
The small fortune his heart pumps for
is hidden in the stained, dancing numbers.
The Ping-Pong balls rise through colored lights,
brief as sparrows
God is in the sleight of the woman’s hand.
He walks from Saint Ann’s, limp and crazy
as the loon that calls its children
across the lake
in its broke, knowing laughter.
Hitchhiking home from the Mission, if he sings,
it is a loud, rasping wail
that saws through the spine
of Ira Comes Last, at the wheel.
Drawn up through the neck ropes,
drawn out of his stomach
by the spirit of the stones that line
the road and speak
to him only in their old agreement.
Ira knows the old man is nuts.
Lets him out at the road that leads up
over stars and the skulls of white cranes.
And through the soft explosions of cattail
and the scattering of seeds on still water,
walks Grandpa, all the time that there is in his hands
that have grown to be the twisted doubles
of the burrows of mole and badger,
that have come to be the absence
of birds in a nest.
Hands of earth, of this clay
I’m also made from.
~~~
these are my people & I find
them on the street & shadow
through any wild all wild
my people my people
a dance of strangers in my blood
the old woman’s sari dissolving to wind
bindi a new moon on her forehead
I claim her my kin & sew
the star of her to my breast
the toddler dangling from stroller
hair a fountain of dandelion seed
at the bakery I claim them too
the sikh uncle at the airport
who apologizes for the pat
down the muslim man who abandons
his car at the traffic light drops
to his knees at the call of the azan
& the muslim man who sips
good whiskey at the start of maghrib
the lone khala at the park
pairing her kurta with crocs
my people my people I can’t be lost
when I see you my compass
is brown & gold & blood
my compass a muslim teenager
snapback & high-tops gracing
the subway platform
mashallah I claim them all
my country is made
in my people’s image
if they come for you they
come for me too in the dead
of winter a flock of
aunties step out on the sand
their dupattas turn to ocean
a colony of uncles grind their palms
& a thousand jasmines bell the air
my people I follow you like constellations
we hear the glass smashing the street
& the nights opening their dark
our names this country’s wood
for the fire my people my people
the long years we’ve survived the long
years yet to come I see you map
my sky the light your lantern long
ahead & I follow I follow
~~~
For Ben’s project he must research five facts
about his African-American hero and write them
on poster board. He chooses Harriet Tubman,
whose five facts are: Her father’s name was Ben.Her mother’s name was Old Rit. She was bornin 1820 and died in 1913. She was born in Marylandand died in New York. Ben asks for advice
about his fifth fact and I suggest: She led more than300 people to freedom. Ben sighs the way he does
now and says, Everyone knows that, Mom.
 
So I try to remember the book we read yesterday,
search for the perfect fact, the one that will match
his four facts and satisfy his almost-seven mind.Remember, I ask, she was a spy for the North during the Civil War? It’s a hit! He writes it:Harriet Tubman was a spy for the north during the civil war. It was a war between the northwhich is where the slaves were trying to getand the south which is where they were.Before the war, Abraham Lincoln signed a formthat said All the slaves everywhere are free!which is one of the reasons they were fighting.
 
On summer mornings, Lincoln rode his horse
to work down the Seventh Street Turnpike
close to my new home. Down Georgia Avenue
past The Hunger Stopper and Pay Day 2 Go and liquor
stores and liquor stores. Past Cluck-U-Chicken
and Fish in the ‘Hood and Top Twins Faze II
Authentic African Cuisine and the newish Metro station
and all those possibilities gleaming in developers’ eyes.
 
There goes Lincoln’s horse down Georgia Avenue
from the Soldier’s Home to the White House –
much cooler up here in the country, in the neighborhood,
at the hospital. And there’s Walt Whitman, the sworn poet
of every dauntless rebel the world over, hanging around
his street corner every morning to bow to the president
at Thomas Circle by the homeless guys. It’s 100 years now
since any president summered at the Soldier’s Home.
But I was born only 50 years after Harriet Tubman died,
all the centuries we drag into the next century and the next.
 
Writing here, in my new neighborhood, the city old
and new around me, I see Harriet Tubman
and Lincoln and Uncle Walt and the true stories
and sometimes our own despair like Washington’s
summer malaria, her 40 war hospitals, Whitman moving
from bed to bed, stroking the hair of so many dying boys.
 
North up Georgia Avenue in our own soldiers’ home –
Walter Reed – the boys and now girls too
mourn the ghosts of their own legs and arms
and our capacity for love. Where is their
sworn poet? Harriet Tubman born
so close. All these heroes under our feet.
~~~
We invent our gods
the way the Greeks did,
in our own image—but magnified.
Athena, the very mother of wisdom,
squabbled with Poseidon
like any human sibling
until their furious tempers
made the sea writhe.
Zeus wore a crown
of lightning bolts one minute,
a cloak of feathers the next,
as driven by earthly lust
he prepared to swoop
down on Leda.
Despite their power,
frailty ran through them
like the darker veins
in the marble of these temples
we call monuments.
Looking at Jefferson now,
I think of the language
he left for us to live by.
I think of the slave
in the kitchen downstairs.
~~~
To each orphaned child—so long as you remain close enough to walk to
your living kin you will dance, feast, feel community in food. This cannot
stand. Eighty acres allotted.
 
To each head of household—so long as you remember your tribal words
for village you will recollect that the grasses still grow and the rivers still
flow. So long as you teach your children these words they will remember
as well. This we cannot allow. One hundred and sixty acres allotted.
 
To each elder unable to till or hunt—so long as your old and injurious habits
sing out over the drum or flicker near the fire you cripple our reward. We
seek to hasten your end. Eighty acres allotted.
 
To each widowed wife—so long as you can make your mark, your land
may be leased. A blessing on your mark when you sign it and walk closer
to your favored white sister. Eighty acres allotted.
 
To each full blood—so long as you have an open hand, we shall fill it with
a broken ploughshare. One hundred and sixty acres allotted.
 
To each half blood, each quarter strain—so long as you yearn for the broken
ploughshare, you will be provided a spade honed to razor in its place.
When every acre of your allotment has been leased or sold, you will turn it
on yourself. From that date begins our real and permanent progress.
 
~~~
My memory of a perfect scent: pine, sage, and cypress;
My friends' faith in the power of rough and winding paths
to take me up a mountain and bring me back.
Specimens plucked from that mountain's pastures:
Indian paintbrush, sego lily, ordinary wildflowers.
How I got them is a story of friendship and passion
Nancy, now a doctor, once a shy sophmore in college
Her husband Mike, the second, better one, and their obsession
with the Great Outdoors—hence an Idaho address.
Boise's Northend is a throwback to neighborhoods American—nice
               homes
Next to two-story garden apartments down the street from a 
               mansion.
Bikes and dogs and hand-pushed lawn mowers.
Where they dwell is a bungalow that spirits Memphis, Tennessee
circa 1971:
The Who blasting off a turntable, marijuana-scented air, boys with
              long hair,
girls wearing their boyfriends' blue jeans, bourbon and acid.
Paperbacks, record albums, text books piled up—azaleas on the
              parkway;
a howl of buzzing bees late spring just before graduation.
Their bungalow has dueling computers and a real backyard.
While Nancy and Mike's boxes are slowly being unpacked,
Their bicycles are carefully racked inside their front door.
Everyone is a thief out West. If you leave your bikes on the porch
They disappear. If you find water, someone else will divert it.
There are those who fight about the wind. Others the sun.
All angling for rights—mineral, water, air—that only comes with
              political power.
Oh, my friends who love to hike, to ski, to bike and me, they love
Are driving me from Boise to Ketchum through mountain and 
               valley beauty.
High desert heat is clear, dry and when your body rises out of  a 
             chilly car,
BLAM.
From there you enter another air conditioning zone:
a general store at the edge of mountain lore.
This place has everything from Bibles to good bourbon.
I almost bought a foot long sausage. I almost bought a gun.
I did buy cowboy postcards, mostly made for fun.
Food and security. Winter just over the ridge, four weeks hence.
I used to watch Death Valley Days.
Death was hinted, but not shown—the wagon turned over,
The wagon train a going.
O, those long-suffering white people fearful of Indians and scared of
             bandits,
desperate for shade, for water, for land flowing milk and honey.
Hard-bitten men and sad-eyed women trekking.
How grand those verdant acres were to be.
What they got was land just green enough for wandering herds of
             long-horned beasts
and no where to farm, no where to hide.
Today, the wind machines whip around:                         BIG ENERGY.
Horses gambol and graze on that patch of land or this keen slope.
No wheat and corn, not even dope grows here.
But silver, gold, treasures unknown lode these mountains
inviting speculation, misery, and bad legislation.
A few miles up from Sun Valley, we enter a trail.
Mike and Nancy smile and cajole.
Straw hat and baseball cap attest to sun's plenty.
Their walking sticks to the rocks' ready
challenge to ankles and limbs.
Our water pouches are overflowing.
What were my friends thinking?
We slip and slide on the side of this mountain and step aside
for the sculpted women in tank tops and biker shorts—trotting as
               fast as
Nancy and Mike's favorite dog
She runs ahead following the blonde beauties until all is shadow.
We greet each other with glee.
I am the novice hiker. I am afraid of falling into thin air.
One large Black woman with a bum knee. What were they
             thinking?
She will love the smell. Pine, sage, and cypress.
She will love the sound. Wind shakes aspens. Water crinkles rock
She will love the sight. Wildflowers—whites, yellows, purples and
               reds:
Indian paintbrush, sego lily, the wily cinquefoil.
When friends give you what you need, what more can you ask?
Oh the pleasure in a mountain's power to quiet a panicked heart.
The glade refined.
Hawk's home, wolf's dream, bears far away.
Stewards of American beauty—these are the paths my friends make
               in wild places
—the rise and fall of future walks.
I salute their obsession for Idaho's red undulating hills.
Whose mountain ranges east to west like those in the Himalayas
says a guidebook, but ours is a different story—in this young
              mountain,
on these new hills, circumspect is the American West.
Where people steal
a drop of ore,
a native flower,
a piece of splendor
day in and day out.
~~~
Some years there exists a wanting to escape—
you, floating above your certain ache—  
still the ache coexists.
Call that the immanent you—
You are you even before you
grow into understanding you
are not anyone, worthless,
not worth you.
Even as your own weight insists
you are here, fighting off
the weight of nonexistence.
And still this life parts your lids, you see
you seeing your extending hand
as a falling wave—
/
I they he she we you turn
only to discover
the encounter
to be alien to this place.
Wait.
The patience is in the living. Time opens out to you.
The opening, between you and you, occupied,
zoned for an encounter,
given the histories of you and you—
And always, who is this you?
The start of you, each day,
a presence already—
Hey you—
/
Slipping down burying the you buried within. You are
everywhere and you are nowhere in the day.
The outside comes in—
Then you, hey you—
Overheard in the moonlight.
Overcome in the moonlight.
Soon you are sitting around, publicly listening, when you
hear this—what happens to you doesn't belong to you,
only half concerns you He is speaking of the legionnaires
in Claire Denis's film Beau Travail and you are pulled back
into the body of you receiving the nothing gaze—
The world out there insisting on this only half concerns
you. What happens to you doesn't belong to you, only half
concerns you. It's not yours. Not yours only.
/
And still a world begins its furious erasure—
Who do you think you are, saying I to me?
You nothing.
You nobody.
You.
A body in the world drowns in it—
Hey you—
All our fevered history won't instill insight,
won't turn a body conscious,
won't make that look
in the eyes say yes, though there is nothing
to solve
even as each moment is an answer.
/
Don't say I if it means so little,
holds the little forming no one.
You are not sick, you are injured—
you ache for the rest of life.
How to care for the injured body,
the kind of body that can't hold
the content it is living?
And where is the safest place when that place
must be someplace other than in the body?
Even now your voice entangles this mouth
whose words are here as pulse, strumming
shut out, shut in, shut up—
You cannot say—
A body translates its you—
you there, hey you
/
even as it loses the location of its mouth.
When you lay your body in the body
entered as if skin and bone were public places,
when you lay your body in the body
entered as if you're the ground you walk on,
you know no memory should live
in these memories
becoming the body of you.
You slow all existence down with your call
detectable only as sky. The night's yawn
absorbs you as you lie down at the wrong angle
to the sun ready already to let go of your hand.
Wait with me
though the waiting, wait up,
might take until nothing whatsoever was done.
/
To be left, not alone, the only wish— 
to call you out, to call out you.
Who shouted, you? You
shouted you, you the murmur in the air, you sometimes
sounding like you, you sometimes saying you,
go nowhere,
be no one but you first—
Nobody notices, only you've known,
you're not sick, not crazy,
not angry, not sad—
It's just this, you're injured.
/
Everything shaded everything darkened everything
shadowed
is the stripped is the struck—
is the trace
is the aftertaste.
I they he she we you were too concluded yesterday to
know whatever was done could also be done, was also
done, was never done—
The worst injury is feeling you don't belong so much
to you—
~~~
Just like  Jesus     I   am   a time   machine     I   go   away  I   come   back     they won’t   let   me   watch    things   die
and     the  spy   in   the   spine     a   hearse   of  sense  and  rumors     a bundle      of   all   that’s    possible    in     a body
tied  to   its      back    with   the  babble    of    hypocrites        and    dirty   rivers          if    you    fall   asleep    in yellow
and    awake      in     a  bed   of   cotton  wool   with    a  star   of   nails   where     your   heart   should   go     and   the
cosmetics     of     wartime     blood  lipping wax     in    a   factory     basement    attached   to  a   slab   of   maple      you
do   not  have   to  love  that man      to  slice   his lips      and   scream        what   divination  turned  into   demon   by
ignoring    you    alone    can    remember     and      revert     to    God     I   give    the   woven   whisper   of   a kid   to
her    first   brown   doll    mounted     to     a   branch     of     song       she    sings       reasons     that   we   fear      ourfeelings—   To   the  dice   in   the  tree    she  is   singing    as   the   torches   come   up  throbbing    and    grinning
a crimson  minnow   in   her   last est  lap
~~~
PART ONEI
Slip-pilings on the Brooklyn littoral
—the poles still tarry, flimsy; the ferry terminus
with its walledup doors wan doorshapes
on eroded sills. Downstream, the strutwork
of the Williamsburg cable tower
threw its cool shadow half a mile inland
over tarpaper seams, gantried water butts,
and splintery tenement cornices milled
with acanthus and classical grasses
of nineteenth-century dream-slum fantasy.
We could see, from our rooftops, the endspan
floating its ant-threads of traffic
to the granite salients of the anchorage,
and through its strands on the west
the Financial District’s watery silhouettes.
But it was our own foundations, crumbling
in the sandy soil, that made us protest
the drill rigs sounding for a wider bridge ramp
to funnel the airport traffic over us
into Manhattan. “Construction tremors
will weaken our buildings”: from the over-roosted
tenements clinging near the anchorage
flew manuscript lists of signatures, block-groups’
painfully Englished petitions. But City Hall
adoze, sleep-feeding, just flooded usII
with chimerical figures and blueprints,
wearing us down. Our own “block-leader,” Luz,
a Guatemalan law student at NYU
where I studied classics, distracted us
more easily with her “pure language”
or anti-Puerto Rican tirades. “Call that Spanish?
Take my sitter—muy indio, still speaks some
Maya mountain-language BUT
the beautiful Spanish!” And so one evening this sitter,
Pilar, came over—forty, perhaps, with a long
fawn-tinted oval face, and read in low tones
an archaic poem to the Madonna. “My daughter
knows it in Quiché and English—” and she passed around,
wistfully, a First Communion photo—flat cheekbones
like her mother’s, long black braids, straight look.
Luz told us Pilar had lost husband
and son to the Violence; a machine-gunned
death heap in the center of their village—
“They killed all the men. But when my family
came here, she came with her girl, we helped with the
green card, and she’s a hotel maid now
near the UN ...” Much realer, this, than our own
bridge-inflicted, some-day disaster. And who knew
but our bridge might metamorphose,
as the City said (“Global cities draw capital”), into a river
of money (“We’ll all sell cuchifritos on the ramp”),
and anyway, mainly, summerIII
was running out, with its open evenings
and windows. One Saturday, turning onto my block
from the subway, I heard my name, crossed
the street where twin buildings had area-ways.
and saw you waving, the same, Pilar,
from a window below the swag-bellied area railings.
“Come have some coffee—go around in back.”
I walked down the building-side, and turned in a trash-littered
airwell by a door with multiple doorbells.
You opened from a wooden hallway, unpainted,
with padlocked doors. “See, the super’s cut up his flat
for illegals. They took out an inside wall, so our room
has a window—we all share the bath.” I entered
a lime-walled room—chairs and table, sofa-bed. Your front wall
was the building front, the three others
drywall. On the bureau, a black-shawledprie-dieu: two photos; two candles in translucent, white-waxed sacks,
and a polychrome Madonna with meeting brows.
Through your window, car wheels, railings; and, above,
my own second-story windows. “We saw you
reading there,” you said from behind me, “when we moved in.”
You sat me on the sofa, and formally presented your daughter
(she moved her schoolbooks all to one end.) Near her, a shallow,
linoleumed-over trench and a bathroom sink. You said:
“I’m a widow from the mountains near Morache, very near
the home-town of Señora Luz. My real work is hotel maid, and I’ve got
a nice job, at a place called the Tricontinental.”
Then you paused, and I felt how clearly
you’d presented yourself, as Americans do, with your job,
your état civil, and I said: “I’m a graduate student
at NYU, where Luz studies, no, not married, no children ...”
I tried to add something else at once, to leave this less ...
definitive, but nothing came, so we ran through bridge-rumors,
and soon we were hardly listening, waiting
for our own next word, and laughing at our gabble. Pequita
told us what the priest had said
about the drilling; you spoke of Pequita’s
First Communion, and none of us could stop
finding striking things to say. Next day you came over
to see my plants, and I came back for soup-supper, looking up
at my windows, which in the easy half-yellow light
of autumn looked oddly beckoning. As we ate,
you leaned forward, with a sudden rogue’s smile,
and mockingly proposed that we three walk across the bridge,
“There’s a path up there. If the bridge
is bad, we’ll tell off the Mayor—” (In what spirit, I wondered,
had you listened to our committee?) And when I got home
I looked down, and through your sheer curtains saw you
cleaning up, and Pequita, at the table, reading.IV
But next week, instead of the plank stair
that zigzags up the anchorage-side, we wandered
the riverside shipping alleys. From below, we could see
overhead the under-arch of the bridge, and feel
the resonant top-thrum of westbound
subways and trucks. Then the riverside—I loved
this part. A sort of post-industrial fenworld, with tiny
terrace houses, big dredger-parts laid aside
from the drillings, and abandoned wreckers’ lots
filled with sea-floor light and trembling, long-awned
panicles of switchgrass. Its timelessness
soothed me—though ephemeral. Even that day, one freshly
tuckpointed facade, and a pair of brandnew bronze
Edwardian mermaid doorknockers. I could see
our quarter five years from now, say—the withering
discount chains, tentative boutiques,
and mother and daughter figuring, to the upscale
“pioneers,” as neighborhood indigenes, living on
with strange literalness among them, supplying
their just-permissible quantum of urban grit.
You were ahead, and Pequita trailed us, rattling weed stalks
with a stray lath. As we progressed in and out
of the endspan’s slatted shadows, you turned
and called me into a side-lot—sunken concrete, flask-
green puddles, to a broken-off building wall. It had been
interior, once—rows of soiled roomsized
plaster squares trailing sawn pipes, with one high trembling
toilet, like a pearl. In a lower square, fringed
with ailanthus and barbs of gang graffiti,
was a mural. Muy latino: the mountain
dreaming the city: a terrace cafe with palm trees
and a dancer shawled in black lace, with inward-angled
castanets. And you lifted yourself on tiptoe,
Pilar, to touch the lace, as you might have grazed
Pequita’s cheek. I felt a pang, as if I already needed you
sturdy inside your sturdy body, not this gesture
as if, exiled within, you reached out— We stepped
back, museum-wise, to contemplate, and you said:
“Luz likes to say I’m some mountain-woman, but when
my mother died, I lived with my aunt in the City—I only
went back when I married.” I told her I’d lived
in this city, with a stepmother, who’d divorced my uncle
to marry my father; and beat me. “A stepmother’s
a curse of God,” you said gently. And on the walk back,
pointed out more wall palms, beaches, until New York
seemed a dot in a belt of capitals
high on the globe: world-cities, packed
with immigrants, refugees, Gastarbeiter: a snowy
latitude suffused with tropical nostalgia.V
We were a threesome. Coffee, suppers, TV,
Pequita at my computer—you’d asked me to teach her—
or sleeping on my sofa, one bad month
they moved you to night shift. Yet only that summer,
I’d worked in my window like a scholar
in a lamplit bay, the night filled with myriad noises,
like Roman Juvenal, to whose ears “came ever
the sounds of buildings collapsing.” Across, the two
tenement-faces, florid, all bucrania, meanders, dusky trails
of fire-escape bedding. And everything underlit
by the sinister, slow-stopping car lights of our street.
But now it was the dailiness of two
from another hemisphere. Through snow-fissures, winds fluting
on railings and building-flaws, Pilar in her low frame
paced with armfuls of laundry, washed
in the sink and hung to dry everywhere. The thousand
stratagems of those who simply must not spend;
and the tiny mother-decisions: though you preferred
periphery, housekeeping around her,
you’d make yourself interrupt her, to mop
behind your sweeping. And Pequita—I saw her wrap
you up on the sofa when you had flu, and bring you
orange juice, as they’d taught her in school, for she
loved you, she was the person who loved you—
I saw too, that of what I wanted the university
to be for me—a tiny model of the city
with its own rules and subsets: “Tell me
each day who I am”—you’d found your part
in Pequita; I followed the shape
of your day touching center as it funneled
into her hand and moving pencil-point.VI
For everything seemed natural to Pequita:
the Credo, her photocopied choir music
piled beside the tidy prie-dieu,
our neighborhood of syringe-filled gutters, drug-stoops and pimps,
her school’s turkey cutouts, metal detectors, backed-up toilets ...
Our human wilderness, half-urban, half-surreal
to her was a matter-of-fact Eden, like the picturesque ruins
and laughably rococo grottoes imagined
by the seicento as the Golden Age.
—And I, I thought her whole world, it comes back—
touching, as if her child’s paradisial will were there
for my affectionate recreation, like our still faithfully,
occasionally, typed-up and dispatched
protests from the Ramp Committee to the Mayor. Slight effects
of perspective, tiny human gestures
giving point to the city’s vast, ironic beauty.PART TWOVII
At a moment when no one was thinking
about her, Pequita awoke. Perhaps
she enjoyed the solitude, Pilar asleep,
me asleep across the street. She got up
and stood on the cheap oval bathroom rug
before the sink. At seven the drills started,
deeper-toned than ever before (they woke me)—
and part of your ceiling fell in; a beam
splintered, plummeting straight to the oval rug—
The person screaming over the phone
was Pilar. I thought it must be really
all right, or she’d be crying not screaming,
but when I’d called 911 and run over, Pequita
was barely alive.
Then the hospital corridors,
me trying to close my winter coat
(the buttons were off) on my nightgown, you
on a bench, staring straight ahead.
When they said Pequita was
“gone,” you were utterly silent. I brought you
to my place (though our street was a tangle
of police lights and yellow tape), terrified
of your fixed inner focus, as if you had
a plan ... Next night I had Luz stay over,
I slept at her place; the third I was back. You,
thank God (I thought), were crying, and Luz
had set up the service. She propelled us downstairs
and to a tiny brick church I must often have passed
without seeing it, two blocks inland.
Egg-blue inside, it was, with a little green
and gilt altar, dark Stations on the walls,
and the statue of the Virgin of Guadeloupe
placed oddly below the altar stairs, so that Pilar,
after the death-mass, could kneel
before her, praying straight into her face,
while I on a kneeler buried mine in my hands.
What would the mother live for now, the hotel, me, or Luz,
already writing more endless mad letters? Yet only these
had from the City real answers: they’d brace the drill site
with vibration-absorbing piers; and they wanted
her and her friend Mrs. Citrin to know
“that no one else had been more than lightly injured.”VIII
It was the end of winter, very dark. The building
managers, nervy, had moved you to the first floor
next door, till you found a new place (I knew
you weren’t looking). Each day I saw you
arrive from work, answer my call tersely,
then pull down your blinds. A shadow showed rarely,
flattened, shapeless; you lay on your sofa a lot.
“Thanks Anne—I’m better without company,” or
“please understand.” But often, later
in the evening, you’d come down the stairs
and turn inland. Then, one morning as I was passing
with early groceries, you were leaving the parish hall
in your black winter coat, heavily scarved,
and we paused. Approvingly, you tapped one glove
on my armload—you’d told me to cook more, dictated
recipes. I asked if this had been Pequita’s
choir-practice place; the sentence wavered,
but you replied with grim joy,
“She’s not practicing now.” It took me a minute.
Pequita was singing, this moment, in the Presence.
Still what you felt most (it was in your face)
was absence, absence, but from something bitter
in your eyes, that seemed small and round with the cold, I felt
your desire to exclude me and our old collusive ironies.
What were such luxuries now, ironies, Anglo friends;
and I thought you hated my mind
that remembered the brownpapered books,
the orange juice. I reached to touch your arm—to get past
this, but no, you had to get home:
“I fasted for communion”; and your eyes
swerved away. All my laughable,
my lovely, delusional studies, that I’d seen you
sort through for Pequita, were now an affront. And yet
I felt you moving behind your own mind, as if
with something held in reserve ...IX
But then you stopped answering the phone, went
less often to church. What I thought
was that you were angry (certainly I was). Perhaps
I thought you needed to talk, and I’d visit you
in Manhattan. So one morning in March,
in the black coat I’d got for the funeral, I walked east
from the forty-second street Lexington stop
to the three-story, fairy-lit jungle atrium
of the Tricontinental, and went to the seventh floor,
where you started. There was a cart in the hall,
a gleaming chrome maid’s cart half-projecting
from a bedroom. On its sides were rows
of glasses with lace sani-bonnets, gold-
stamped mini-soaps and deodorants. It moved out,
and you stood in the door with a sheet-load, looking fat
in a starchy pink uniform monogrammedPILAR. When you saw me, you dropped the sheets
and in pain, pressed both palms to your cheeks,
and looked at me looking at you. When
I started sobbing, you took my shoulder and backed me
to the elevator. Pressed the button, stepped back,
and then, to my surprise, gave me a sudden hug
before pushing me in.X
It had been always this half-connected
and tenuous, our friendship. What light on my own
isolation and need, that I hadn’t known.
But you actually called me, that week, to propose
our old joke, a bridge walk—maybe Saturday?
Your voice in my ears sounded wobbly
with tension, held-backness, so I got in first:
a friend had wound up her doctorate and left me
a minute Village studio starting June ... After that
I could listen, somber, as you poured out
your need to leave, Luz’s cousin, the possible
hotel job “right in LA.” You added “Anne,” and broke off.
“Well, I’ll tell you that later. Look, it may
snow on Saturday, OK?” “I don’t care.” And before
you hung up, I’d resigned you,
given you up. We’d part, on my side
in anger, on yours in oblivion. I met you
at the foot of the anchorage stair
(not the eastern approach, with its easy grade
near the ramp site). We climbed through the snow,
slowly, pausing at landings for different
views of our old alley world. Like a museum
of disused urban functions—we noted a bricked-over
backyard privy arch, and from higher, roof-huts, inkily distinct,
of old-style tenement dumbwaiters. The whole scene
thrown out of drawing by one of those giant
NYC cable-spools, charred at the bottom
where some homeless had tried to burn it.
The moist snow was sweeping
through the cable tower when we clambered
onto the path beneath it. As we moved, hunched slightly,
onto the mainspan, the whole city abruptly
whited-out to a monochrome geometry
of vertical and stooping gray lines. I thought
how Pequita would have loved it, and caught
her mother’s eye. We went on cautiously, soon
pausing to stamp our boots and look over the rail
at the traffic lanes below us. “Anne, what
I started to say before—this is it: I’m sorry
I didn’t talk to you—you understand?” “Of course,”
I lied aimlessly. But you, glancing sideways,
“But I’m really sorry ...” “No, really ...” You shook
your head slightly, then took my arm. “Okay then—
what’s this thing?” pointing a snowy boot
at a bolt as high as our knees, with a rusted-on octagonal
nut: “It’s just a bolt.” You tapped your glove on a strut—
“strut,” I provided. And you said, pompously, in Luz’ very
intonations (in what spirit had you
listened?)—“The tolerances just aren’t there.”
Then, feeling easier, we started naming everything—
spikes, spun-wire vertical cables: English,
Spanish, and then I heard you speak Quiché (words once
for vines, for split trunks
over gorges?) But everything on the bridge was
shabby, neglected-looking; and you said
soberly: “If anyone was supposed
to look after this bridge, he’s forgot all about it.”
We didn’t link arms again, but started back, pausing
to throw a few loose snowballs
on the Manhattan traffic below us. We’d go
our separate ways—I’d go on delaying, skirting
around my burnt-out places; you’d go
where you could, forget what you could—
some Job-like relinquishment of inquiry
or thought; organisms tend to persist ... When
we got down to the massive base
of the anchorage, we managed a hug
that took in our past, at least: one embrace
of two black winter coats in the snow.
~~~
I was born in Boston in
1949. I never wanted
this fact to be known, in
fact I’ve spent the better
half of my adult life
trying to sweep my early
years under the carpet
and have a life that
was clearly just mine
and independent of
the historic fate of
my family. Can you
imagine what it was
like to be one of them,
to be built like them,
to talk like them
to have the benefits
of being born into such
a wealthy and powerful
American family. I went
to the best schools,
had all kinds of tutors
and trainers, traveled
widely, met the famous,
the controversial, and
the not-so-admirable
and I knew from
a very early age that
if there were ever any
possibility of escaping
the collective fate of this famous
Boston family I would
take that route and
I have. I hopped
on an Amtrak to New
York in the early
‘70s and I guess
you could say
my hidden years
began. I thought
Well I’ll be a poet.
What could be more
foolish and obscure.
I became a lesbian.
Every woman in my
family looks like
a dyke but it’s really
stepping off the flag
when you become one.
While holding this ignominious
pose I have seen and
I have learned and
I am beginning to think
there is no escaping
history. A woman I
am currently having
an affair with said
you know  you look
like a Kennedy. I felt
the blood rising in my
cheeks. People have
always laughed at
my Boston accent
confusing “large” for
“lodge,” “party”
for “potty.” But
when this unsuspecting
woman invoked for
the first time my
family name
I knew the jig
was up. Yes, I am,
I am a Kennedy.
My attempts to remain
obscure have not served
me well. Starting as
a humble poet I
quickly climbed to the
top of my profession
assuming a position of
leadership and honor.
It is right that a
woman should call
me out now. Yes,
I am a Kennedy.
And I await
your orders.
You are the New Americans.
The homeless are wandering
the streets of our nation’s
greatest city. Homeless
men with AIDS are among
them. Is that right?
That there are no homes
for the homeless, that
there is no free medical
help for these men. And women.
That they get the message
—as they are dying—
that this is not their home?
And how are your
teeth today? Can
you afford to fix them?
How high is your rent?
If art is the highest
and most honest form
of communication of
our times and the young
artist is no longer able
to move here to speak
to her time…Yes, I could,
but that was 15 years ago
and remember—as I must
I am a Kennedy.
Shouldn’t we all be Kennedys?
This nation’s greatest city
is home of the business-
man and home of the
rich artist. People with
beautiful teeth who are not
on the streets. What shall
we do about this dilemma?
Listen, I have been educated.
I have learned about Western
Civilization. Do you know
what the message of Western
Civilization is? I am alone.
Am I alone tonight?
I don’t think so. Am I
the only one with bleeding gums
tonight. Am I the only
homosexual in this room
tonight. Am I the only
one whose friends have
died, are dying now.
And my art can’t
be supported until it is
gigantic, bigger than
everyone else’s, confirming
the audience’s feeling that they are
alone. That they alone
are good, deserved
to buy the tickets
to see this Art.
Are working,
are healthy, should
survive, and are
normal. Are you
normal tonight? Everyone
here, are we all normal.
It is not normal for
me to be a Kennedy.
But I am no longer
ashamed, no longer
alone. I am not
alone tonight because
we are all Kennedys.
And I am your President.
 
~~~
Because she'd heard him laugh through new moon darkness
and she knew he'd fallen and she knew, before she turned,
he'd be crawling, like a crawdad, rock to loam—
because she tried to love the straight back and neck
he'd erected to recollect the man he'd been
before—because she found herself adding up his usefulness
like some kind of auctioneer—she showed him
the dark coils areoling both her breasts and all the ways
she bent and lifted, bent and lifted, steady, strong.
She let him believe he was past due for a harvest
and her hands were the right ones, now, to hold onto the scythe.
 
                                                         • 
She made quick work of pleasure. The boysmile bunked down
in his eyes, she claimed. Her tongue found the place in his mouth
where the teeth were gone—where he'd hold his corncakes
until they grew soft enough to chew. History had bedded him
in all of this—his own history and failures not his own.
Before he'd tramped in she'd watched another man—a man she'd thought
she'd hated—watched his body opened, opened, opened until
blood had married brine. She'd watch that man be whipped into something
good for nothing more than fertilizing clay and she'd thought
buckshot would have been a brand of kindness if sprayed into him
just then. But even after his hard going, she did not miss him very much.
                                                        •
Anyone she chose could be shucked like surplus property tomorrow,
but that hadn't been enough to warn her off of picking him that night.
Because she knew if she set her sight on nothing she'd get nothing
in return, she'd walked with him. But because the night progressed so
—because there were some clouds—no stars—no moon—he'd tripped
over the branch of a dead and down tree. In all that darkness,
there, without a moon, even then, she had not fallen. She thought
to say so, but she did not say so. She did nothing
but say she was sorry for him. She did not use her mouth
to say this. Could he not listen to her hands? They spoke softly,
articulating her condolences, to his torn and bleeding skin.
 
~~~
I buy a Mana Party T-shirt from AliExpress.
$9.99 free shipping via standard post.
Estimated arrival 14–31 working days.
Tracking unavailable via DSL. Asian size XXL.
I wear it as a dress with thigh-high vinyl boots
and fishnets. I post a picture to Instagram.
Am I navigating correctly? Tell me,
which stars were my ancestors looking at?
And which ones burnt the black of searching irises
and reflected something genuine back? I look to
Rihanna and Kim Kardashian shimmering in
Swarovski crystals. Make my eyes glow with seeing.
I am inhaling, long white clouds and I see
rivers of milk running toward orange oceans of
sunlit honey. Tell me, am I navigating correctly?
I want to spend my money on something bougie,
like custom-made pounamu hoop earrings. I want to
make them myself but my line doesn’t trace back
to the beauties in the south making amulets
with elegant fingers. I go back into blackness,
I go back and fill in the gaps, searching through archives
of advertisements: Welcome to the Wonderland
of the South Pacific. Tiki bars, traffic-light cocktails &
paper umbrellas. Tell me, am I navigating correctly?
Steering through the storm drunk & wet-faced
waking up to the taste of hangover, a dry mouth, a strange bed,
shirt above my head is the flag fluttering over everything.
What were we celebrating? The 6th of February is the anniversary
of the greatest failed marriage this nation has ever seen.
In America, couples have divorce parties. We always arrive
fashionably late. Tell me, am I navigating correctly? The sea
our ancestors traversed stretches out farther than the stars.
~~~
Lit with strange carpentry magic — 
they build time-shares in her head. They carve
names deep in wood, erect beams of metal to hold up
the invincible defense of a bad history. They mourn
what’s subjective. They are shutters closed.
Sometimes I imagine such men in flip-flops
with fat towels draped over confident shoulders.
I imagine they all live in Texas, and find
South Padre too hot, and then I imagine them blaming
diversity for everything. Here, in the middle of grief,
we pout to the rhythm of their sentences.
Suns hiss in their dreams. Soon such critics will meet
daily for prayers. The Pharisees identify the guilty woman.
They are gathering sticks for a witch burning. Curandera
lit with the fire of sighs, casts spells, burns sage,
sweats in a lodge, her own prayers flaming.
~~~
On seeing some pictures of the interior of his house, Washington, D.C.



Only the casket left, the jewel goneWhose noble presence filled these stately rooms,And made this spot a shrine where pilgrims came—Stranger and friend—to bend in reverenceBefore the great, pure soul that knew no guile;To listen to the wise and gracious wordsThat fell from lips whose rare, exquisite smileGave tender beauty to the grand, grave face.Upon these pictured walls we see thy peers,—Poet, and saint, and sage, painter, and king,—A glorious band;—they shine upon us still;Still gleam in marble the enchanting formsWhereupon thy artist eye delighted dwelt;Thy favorite Psyche droops her matchless face,Listening, methinks, for the beloved voiceWhich nevermore on earth shall sound her praise.All these remain,—the beautiful, the brave, The gifted, silent ones; but thou art gone!Fair is the world that smiles upon us now;Blue are the skies of June, balmy the airThat soothes with touches soft the weary brow;And perfect days glide into perfect nights,—Moonlit and calm; but still our grateful heartsAre sad, and faint with fear,— for thou art gone!Oh friend beloved, with longing, tear-filled eyesWe look up, up to the unclouded blue,And seek in vain some answering sign from thee.Look down upon us, guide and cheer us stillFrom the serene height where thou dwellest now;Dark is the way without the beacon lightWhich long and steadfastly thy hand upheld.Oh, nerve with courage new the stricken heartsWhose dearest hopes seem lost in losing thee.
~~~
Not by hammering the furious word,
Nor bread stamped in the streets,
Nor milk emptied in gutter,
Shall we gain the gates of the city.
 
But I am a prophet without eyes to see;
I do not know how we shall gain the gates
                  of the city.August, 1943
 
~~~
The future is as sterile as a robot’s loincloth.
I drown my hands in sanitizer until they pucker.
 
Where this soapbox tree germinates, I collect
my germs and make a fountain of them.
 
Because yellow is yarrow and soot, and the future,
I’ve learned, is no suture. Because where I’m from,
these kisses are infections. Because dirt’s
 
ammunition against discipline, the blood fills
my clean mouth with dismay. Am I surprised—
Hollywood still assumes we are all the bastard
 
children of the same evil dictator? That phosgene
and mustard will rack our titanium Maoist husks
until some white man with slanty eyes rescues us
 
from our mealy, pliant selves? Am I to wear Dior,
wrap my mouth in bloody tulle, before kneeling,
bending to kiss a mouth dirtied by Pantone 136?
 
No fucking thanks. Because where I’m from,
these kisses are infractions. Darlings, let’s rewrite
the script. Let’s hijack the narrative, steer
 
the story ourselves. There’d be a heist, a battle.
Audre Lorde would write the script. My leading
man would be Bruce. We’d earn our happy ending.
 
Instead, they give me 1981. 2012. Quantum quasars,
new dystopia—plutonium wars. We’re not in Polanski’s
Chinatown anymore. Yet we still have the same bowl
 
haircuts. Bangs, big bang, a city of fetid promise, new
minor galaxy where we cannot touch. Instead our skin
is rust and metal. It gratifies the technophile in all of us.
 
~~~
            I want to tell you, ladies and gentlemen, there’s not enough
            troops in the army to force the southern people to break
            down segregation and accept the Negro [pronounced Nigra]
            into our theatres, into our swimming pools, into our homes,
            and into our churches.
                                    —Strom Thurmond, South Carolina
                                    Senator and Presidential Candidate
                                         for the States’ Rights Party, 1948
 
            I said, “I’m gonna fight Thurmond from the mountain to
            the sea.”
                                    —Modjeska Monteith Simkins, Civil
                              Rights Matriarch, South Carolina, 1948
 



The youngest has been married off.
 
He is as tall as Abraham Lincoln. Here, on his
wedding day, he flaunts the high spinning laugh
of a newly freed slave. I stand above him, just
off the second-floor landing, watching
the celebration unfold.
 
Uncle-cousins, bosom buddies, convertible cars
of nosy paramours, strolling churlish penny-
pinchers pour onto the mansion estate. Below,
Strom Thurmond is dancing with my mother.
 
The favorite son of South Carolina has already
danced with the giddy bride and the giddy bride’s
mother. More women await: Easter dressy,
drenched in caramel, double exposed, triple cinched,
lined up, leggy, ready.
 
I refuse to leave the porch.
 
If I walk down I imagine he will extend his
hand, assume I am next in his happy darky line,
#427 on his dance card. His history
and mine, burnt cork and blackboard chalk,
concentric, pancaked, one face, two histories,
slow dragging, doing the nasty.
 
My father knows all this.
 
Daddy’s Black Chief Justice legs straddle the boilerplate
carapace of the CSS H. L. Hunley, lost Confederate
submarine, soon to be found just off the coast of
Charleston. He keeps it fully submerged by
applying the weight of every treatise he has
ever written against the death penalty of
South Carolina. Chanting “Briggs v. Elliott,”
he keeps the ironside door of the submarine shut.
No hands.
 
His eyes are a Black father’s beacon, search-
lights blazing for the married-off sons, and
on the unmarried, whale-eyed nose-in-book
daughter, born unmoored, quiet, yellow,
strategically placed under hospital lights to
fully bake. The one with the most to lose.
 
There will be no trouble. Still, he chain-
smokes. A burning stick of mint & Indian
leaf seesaws between his lips. He wants
me to remember that trouble is a fire that
runs like a staircase up then down. Even
on a beautiful day in June.
 
I remember the new research just out:
What the Negro gave America
Chapter 9,206:
 Enslaved Africans gifted porches to NorthAmerica. Once off the boats they were told,then made, to build themselves a place—to live. 
They build the house that will keep them alive.
 
Rather than be the bloody human floret on
yet another southern tree, they imagine higher
ground. They build landings with floor enough
to see the trouble coming. Their arced imaginations
nail the necessary out into the floral air. On the
backs and fronts of twentypenny houses,
a watching place is made for the ones who will
come tipping with torch & hog tie through the
quiet woods, hoping to hang them as decoration
in the porcupine hair of longleaf.
 
The architecture of Black people is sui generis.
This is architecture dreamed by the enslaved:
 
Their design will be stolen.
Their wits will outlast gold.
My eyes seek historical rest from the kiss-
kiss theater below; Strom Thurmond’s
it’s-never-too-late-to-forgive-me chivaree.
I search the tops of yellow pine while my
fingers reach, catch, pinch my father’s
determined-to-rise smoke.
 
Long before AC African people did the
math: how to cool down the hot air of
South Carolina?
 
If I could descend, without being trotted
out by some roughrider driven by his
submarine dreams, this is what I’d take
my time and scribble into the three-tiered,
white créme wedding cake:
 Filibuster. States’ Rights. The Grand Inquisitionof the great Thurgood Marshall. This weddingreception would not have been possible withoutthe Civil Rights Act of 1957 (opposed byyou-know-who). 
The Dixiecrat senator has not worn his
sandy seersucker fedora to the vows.
The top of Strom Thurmond’s bald head
reveals a birthmark tattooed in contrapposto
pose: Segregation Forever.
 
All my life he has been the face of hatred;
the blue eyes of the Confederate flag,
the pasty bald of white men pulling wooly
heads up into the dark skirts of trees,
the sharp, slobbering, amber teeth of
German shepherds, still clenched inside
the tissue-thin, (still marching), band-leader
legs of Black schoolteachers, the single-
minded pupae growing between the legs of
white boys crossing the tracks, ready to
force Black girls into fifth-grade positions,
Palmetto state-sanctioned sex 101.
 
I didn’t want to dance with him.
 
My young cousin arrives at my elbow.
Her beautiful lips the color of soft-skin
mangoes. She pulls, teasing the stitches
of my satin bridesmaid gown, “You better
go on down there and dance with Strom—
while he still has something left.”
 
I don’t tell her it is unsouthern for her
to call him by his first name, as if they
are familiar. I don’t tell her: To bear
witness to marriage is to believe that
everything moving through the sweet
wedding air can be confidently, left—
to Love.
 
I stand on the landing high above the
beginnings of Love, holding a plastic
champagne flute, drinking in the warm
June air of South Carolina. I hear my
youngest brother’s top hat joy. Looking
down I find him, deep in the giddy crowd,
modern, integrated, interpretive.
 
For ten seconds I consider dancing with
Strom. His Confederate hands touch
every shoulder, finger, back that I love.
I listen to the sound of Black laughter
shimmying. All worry floats beyond
the gurgling submarine bubbles,
the white railing, every drop of
champagne air.
 
I close my eyes and Uncle Freddie
appears out of a baby’s breath of fog.
(The dead are never porch bound.)
He moves with ease where I cannot.
He walks out on the rice-thrown air,
heaving a lightning bolt instead of
a wave. Suddenly, there is a table set,
complete with 1963 dining room stars,
they twinkle twinkle up & behind him.
Thelonious, Martin, Malcolm, Nina,
Dakota, all mouths Negro wide &
open have come to sing me down.
His tattered almanac sleeps curled like
a wintering slug in his back pocket.
His dark Dogon eyes jet to the scene
below, then zoom past me until they are
lost in the waning sugilite sky. Turning
in the shadows of the wheat fields,
he whispers a truth plucked from
the foreword tucked in his back pocket:Veritas: Black people will forgive you
quicker than you can say OrangeburgMassacre. 
History does not keep books on the
handiwork of slaves. But the enslaved
who built this Big House, long before
I arrived for this big wedding, knew
the power of a porch.
 
This native necessity of nailing down
a place, for the cooling off of air,
in order to lift the friendly, the kindly,
the so politely, the in-love-ly, jubilant,
into the arms of the grand peculiar,
for the greater good of
the public spectacular:
 
us
giving us
away.
~~~
I am the type to go to bed with my feet dirty
A man calling from a balcony is not to be trusted
In 1988, the nation sings a song I can’t understand but I sing it  because everyone looks at me like a thief and no one likes a thief
Algae gather in plastic cups along the Jersey Shore
The dull prongs of a fork still count as a weapon
I gather plastic cups along the shore and shake them out to use for tea, juice, a home for my toothbrush
The pledge of allegiance is a building ledge, an alleged crime, a leg crossed over another leg, a plea gone askew, a glance shared in a room with someone else who looks like you
Hundreds of toxic wild boars are roaming across northern Japan and it would be a mistake to identify with them
In 1960, my grandmother holds no knife in no tall wheat
When washing her feet, my grandmother tells me she spent decades without shoes, wonders if the mud misses her
When we look at each other, we also look away, knowingly
I am a good daughter and I can repeat this indefinitely without  taking a breath
Often, I call out to myself just to hear an echo, to hear something moving in the walls like a healthy family of rats
My mother has been told, repeatedly: “You cannot walk here”
Here is a white stone, a white fence, a white seagull, a white jug of milk, a white candle, a white duvet, a white patio, a white bar of soap to wash your mouth out
Sometimes I dream in Cantonese and I have no idea what is being said
You grow to love what you create, pouring out of your mouth
In 1988, my father sees his reflection in the rearview mirror and identifies with the blood moon lighting his way to Atlantic City
From a balcony, a man yells at me: “You need some white dick” and I turn into a boar
我 在 广 东 做 梦
My father disappears for weeks and my mother keeps weeding the garden, pulling cigarettes from the splintering tomatoes I will devour
I study asymptotes for months and dream in curves — almost but never touching
My mother writes in her English diary for night school: “I hate him I hate him I hate him I hate him I” and her ESL teacher only gives her a check, so I give her a check plus
To be a good daughter means to carry everything with you at all times, the luggage of the past lifted to the mouth
When we look at each other, my mother laughs like an overripe tomato on a windowsill
In 1989, I spent months assembling a puzzle map of the United States of America and the teacher said, “Good job, Jane” and then louder and slower like a drowning sloth: “Gooooood jooooob, Jane” and I did not touch a single piece
Bloody drunk and a blood moon, my father fights with another gambler and jabs at his arm with a dull fork and they both laugh celestially
你 是 一 只 美 丽 的 野 猪
During elementary school, I did not say a single word, not even when called on, and thus the teachers and administrators  decided I could not speak English because they looked at me
Mao Zedong explains math: “In geometry, I just drew a picture of an egg — that was enough geometry for me”
My grandfather was jailed by the Red Army sometime between 1966 and 1976 and my mother says: “I saw him cry when I tried to visit. He wanted to eat the bao I made for him”
Algae gather, gleaming like jewels, on the head of my 5th grade betta fish
Counterrevolutionaries during the Cultural Revolution are likened to “finding a bone inside an egg”
I was born, healthy, in the year of the rat
The man on the balcony invests in a foldable set of two chairs and one table in eggshell white — mold resistant, perfect for outdoor use
你 不 敢 看 我
I was ten when I willed a rock to fall off a ledge, just by staring at it long enough
~~~
The Brent geese fly in long low wavering lines on their migrations.
They start in western Europe, fatten in Iceland, then fly over the
Greenland ice cap to Canada. They sometimes breed on the Arctic
coasts of central and western Siberia and winter in western Europe,
some in England, the rest in Germany and France. What I have to
offer here is nothing revolutionary. They learn the map from their
parents, or through culture rather than through genetics. It is just an
observation, a small observation that sometimes art can hold the oil
wars and all that they mean and might yet mean within. Just as
sometimes there are seven stanzas in a song. And just as sometimes
there is a refrain between each stanza. And just as often this sort of
song tells a certain sort of story, one about having something and then
losing it. Just as sometimes the refrain of a song is just one word said
four times. Just as sometimes the word is huge, sometimes coming
from a machine and yet hitting in the heart; uplifting and ironic and
big enough to hold all these things in its four syllables. Just as some-
times, often even, it contradicts, and thus works with, the stanzas. Just
as the police clear out yet another public space and yet another camera
follows along behind. Just as the stream has no narration, only ambient
noise. And the police move slowly, methodically in a line as if they are
a many-legged machine. They know what they are doing. It is their
third time clearing the park and they will clear it many more times and
then they will win and a building will be built where there once was
the park. In this song, as is true of many songs, it is unclear why the
singer has lost something, maybe someone. In this time, the time of
the oil wars, there are many reasons that singers give for being so lost.
Often they are lost because of love. Sometimes they are lost because of
drugs. Sometimes they have lost their country and in their heart it feels
as if they have lost something big. And then sometimes they are lost
just because they are in Bakersfield. Really though they are lost
because in this time song holds loss. And this time is a time of loss.
The police know, as they move through the park yet one more time,
that they will win and a building will be built on the space. But right
now, the building is not there. All that is there are the police and
debris and the police deal with the debris. They push over book-
shelves, open up boxes and look inside, tear into tents, awkwardly, the
poles springing. They are only there to see if any humans remain.
Tomorrow the bulldozers will push the debris into big piles and load it
into trucks. The police wear white helmets and short sleeves under
their kevlar vests. For many years the Brent geese ate eelgrass, but once
the eelgrass was gone to the wasting disease and the estuaries filled,
they moved inland to agricultural lands and began eating grasses and
winter-sown cereals. The Brent geese are social, adaptable. They fly
around together, learning from each other, even as these groups are
often unstable, changing from season to season. Songs in their most
popular versions tend to be epiphanic, gorgeous with swelling chord
changes, full of lament too. And this song, like many, expresses the
desire to be near someone who is now lost. It travels as something
layered, infiltrated, unconfused with its refusals to make a simple
sense. I want to give you this song sung in a bar in Oakland one night
during the ongoing oil wars. The singer had clearly been lost once, but
they sang as someone who eventually got in the car and drove out of
Bakersfield, perhaps early in the morning, the sun just starting to rise,
or perhaps later after sun-up, the light washing out everything in
Bakersfield as the sun is wont to do there. Eventually they arrived to
sing this song. This might have taken them many years. There was
nothing that implied that the lostness was recent. But the lostness, it
was clear, was huge and had been experienced fully by them. It
probably doesn't matter where the sun was that day in Bakersfield
when they got in the car. It probably just matters that there is a sun,
still, and they got in the car and drove, drove through the oil fields with
their wells pumping out amber colored oils and their refineries with
tall towers that heat the oil so as to sort its various viscosities, and drove
through the black cloud that is the slow constant burn of the oil wars.
Then at some point they were in Oakland. The oil near Bakersfield is
heavy but it often benchmarks against the Brent blend. Brent blend is
a light crude oil, though not as light as West Texas Intermediate. It
contains approximately 0.37% of sulphur, classifying it as sweet crude,
yet not as sweet as West Texas Intermediate. When the park is cleared
and the building is built, it will headquarter an oil company. When
this oil company named their oil fields off the coast of Scotland, they
choose the names of water birds in alphabetical order: Auk, Brent,
Cormorant, Dunlin, Eider, Fulmar, and so on. Brent is also an
acronym for the Jurassic Brent formation that makes up the Brent
oilfield, for Broom, Rannoch, Etive, Ness, and Tarbert. About two
thirds of oil is benchmarked against what is called the Brent Crude Oil
Spot price. Petroleum suppliers in Europe, Africa and the Middle East
often price their oil according to Brent Crude's value on the Interconti-
nential Exchange if it is being sold to the West. The Brent Crude Oil
Spot price is set in dollars, maintained by force, endlessly manipulated
by commodity futures markets. The refrain is the moment when the
singer makes it clear that they understand something about what is
being lost. It was obvious they had lost their country, it being taken
over by bankers and all. They had clearly been rejected. Loved too
much and gotten too little of it back in return, many times. But none
of this matters, it was obvious, in comparison to what is now being lost
for that night even though the song is about a minor loss, about the loss
of tongue on clit or cock, the singer seemed to understand s0mething
about the other things that are lost. While a formation of police clear
the far side of the park of the debris of its occupation, another forma-
tion of police on the other side shoot the new gasses, the ones we do
not yet know by name, into another part of the park where people are
now clustered. This camera  has sound and every few seconds there is a
pop. It is unevenly steady. The song is just about two people who are
not near each other, who have probably chosen not to be near each
other any more. The song reflects and refracts the oil in ways both
relevant and trivial in how it tells about what happens when one lets
love go, when one gives up the tongue. It might be that only through
the minor we can feel enormity. It might be that there is nothing to 
epiphany if it does not hint at the moment of sweaty relation larger
than the intimate. For what is epiphanic song if it doesn't spill out and
over the many that are pulled from intimacies by oil's circulations?
The truckers, the sailors and deckhands, the assembly line workers,
those who maintain the pipelines, those who drive support in the
caravans that escort the tankers, the fertilizers, the thousands of
interlocking plastic parts, the workers who move two hundred miles
and live in a dorm near a factory, alone, those on the ships who spend
fifty weeks circulating with the oil unable to talk to each other because
of no shared language and so are left only with two weeks in each year
where they can experience the tongue in meaningful conversation. A
life that is only circulations. Before the police come, before the
building, in the middle of one night, a group of people form a line
leading to the entrance of the park. Or several groups form several
lines, all leading to the entrance. Some wear medical masks. Some
wear glasses too. All pass bricks, one by one, down the line so as to
make a pile. They are silent for the most part, silent enough that it is
possible to hear the bricks make a clink as they fall. The pile gets
bigger and bigger. It is waist high. Then chest high. Some get out of
the line and climb on the pile, hold both their hands in the air because
they know now is the transitory, momentary triumph and it should be
felt. Others continue passing brick after brick, from one hand to 
another hand, arms extended, torsos at moments also going back and
forth with the bricks. When they run out of bricks, the pile is topped
with fencing. Then they gather behind it, waiting. Back there, some-
one might possibly be singing to a child, singing the epiphanic song
that alludes to losing the moment of tongue on clit or cock over and
over because the child cannot be comforted, because the singer knows
only loss. The room will be dark. The light will be on in the hall.
There will be shadows, in other words. And the singer will know about
these shadows at this moment and know they had agreed to be with
shadows when they had the child. They had gambled in a sense on a
question of sustaining. They had agreed to exist from now on with a 
shadow. A shadow of love and a shadow of the burning of the oil fields that
has already happened and is yet to come and yet must come and a million
other shadows that might possibly disappear in the light at that moment.
 
~~~
When you come, bring your brown-
ness so we can be sure to please
 
the funders. Will you check this
box; we’re applying for a grant.
 
Do you have any poems that speak
to troubled teens? Bilingual is best.
 
Would you like to come to dinner
with the patrons and sip Patrón?
 
Will you tell us the stories that make
us uncomfortable, but not complicit?
 
Don’t read the one where you
are just like us. Born to a green house,
 
garden, don’t tell us how you picked
tomatoes and ate them in the dirt
 
watching vultures pick apart another
bird’s bones in the road. Tell us the one
 
about your father stealing hubcaps
after a colleague said that’s what his
 
kind did. Tell us how he came
to the meeting wearing a poncho
 
and tried to sell the man his hubcaps
back. Don’t mention your father
 
was a teacher, spoke English, loved
making beer, loved baseball, tell us
 
again about the poncho, the hubcaps,
how he stole them, how he did the thing
 
he was trying to prove he didn’t do.
~~~
At the podium
measured and grave as a metronome
the (white, male) poet with bald-
gleaming head broods in gnom-
ic syllables on the death
of 12-year-old (black, male) Tamir Rice
shot in a park
by a Cleveland police officer
claiming to believe
the boy’s plastic pistol
was a “real gun”
like his own eager
to discharge and slay
 
 while twelve feet away at the edge of the bright-lit stage the (white, female) interpreter signing for the deaf is stricken with emotion — horror, pity, disbelief — outrage, sorrow — young-woman face contorted and eyes spilling tears like Tamir Rice’s mother perhaps, or the sister made to witness the child’s bleeding out in the Cleveland park. We stare as the interpreter’s fingers pluck the poet’s words out of the air like bullets, break open stanzas tight as conches with the deft ferocity of a cormo- rant and render gnome-speech raw as hurt, as harm, as human terror wet-eyed and mouth-grimaced in horror’s perfect O.
~~~
I am four in this photograph, standing   
on a wide strip of Mississippi beach,   
my hands on the flowered hips
of a bright bikini. My toes dig in,   
curl around wet sand. The sun cuts   
the rippling Gulf in flashes with each   
tidal rush. Minnows dart at my feet
glinting like switchblades. I am alone
except for my grandmother, other side   
of the camera, telling me how to pose.   
It is 1970, two years after they opened   
the rest of this beach to us,   
forty years since the photograph   
where she stood on a narrow plot   
of sand marked colored, smiling,
her hands on the flowered hips   
of a cotton meal-sack dress.
~~~
It's all foreplay, really-this walk
through the French Quarter exploring souvenir shops,
each of them carefully deranged, as if dust were to settle
only at perfect intervals. Yes to the vetiver fan
that smells sweeter than sandalwood or cedar.
No to the mammy doll dinner bells.
No to the mammy dolls whose sewn smiles are as fixed
as the lives of too many poor Black women here:
motherhood at twelve, drugged, abandoned by fifteen,
dead by twenty (suicide, murder) so easily in Desire.
And yet, their voices sweeten the snaking air,
providing the transvestites their proper Muses,
all of whom have streets named for them in the Garden District.
A soft heat settles on Terpsichore,
just inside the gay bar where the owner's pink flamingos
complement silly songs on the rescued Rockola.
Who can dance to that Lorne Greene ballad, "Ringo"?
Dixie beer is the beer of choice; marijuana the cheapest drug.
Relaxation is key, since it's all a matter of waiting
for the right body to stumble toward you.
Lust perfumes parties in the projects, barstool chatter at the Hyatt,
lazy kissing on the median strip stretching down Tchoupitoulas.
If Professor Longhair were alive, he'd teach a lesson
in seamless motion: the perfect slide of a man's hand down a
              woman's back;
a lesson you learned long ago before you met me. We are making love
as we did before in Austin and Manhattan.
But in this room on this costly bed our lovemaking
starts out the slowest grind, then, like this city's weather,
goes from hot to hotter, from moist to rainstorm wet.
You're tall, A., and where there should be tribal markings
there are scars-football, basketball, mid-sixties grind parties
where something always got out of hand. There's the perfect
amen. You're your own gospel.
And you bring good news to me-the way you enter me
Like grace, the way you say my name, a psalm.
No. That's not it. It's the engineer in you that
gets me. Your search for the secret line that goes
straight to the center of the earth. Deeper and deeper
you go until there's no earth left in me. And we
hum and moan a song as old as our selves gone back.
There are too many souvenirs in your eyes.
Gifts given too often, too hastily, never opened.
Outside a city sprawls its heat, seeks out every pore,
licks every moment of sweat as we shiver in this chilly room
taking each other's measure. We say good-bye again and again.
As if every kiss, every touch we make will shadow
All our celebrations.
And they do.
~~~
Several of my cousins lean up against the house, taking long drags
from the pack of Marlboros we share. We have always been this way
—addicted and generous. A pow wow tape plays from inside the open
garage where two old uncles are thinking to themselves in the safety
of its shadows. Our aunties are in the kitchen, preparing the boiled meat
and chokecherry soup and laughing about old jokes they still hang onto
because these things are a matter of survival. Outside, we ask about
who was driving around with who last night, where so-and-so got beat
up, whose girlfriend left him for someone else. (But she’ll go back to
him, we all think to ourselves.) Aunties carry the full pots and pans to the
picnic table, an uncle prays over our food in Assiniboine. We all want to
forget that we don’t understand this language, we spend lots of time
trying to forget in different ways. No one notices that the wild turnips
are still simmering in a pot on the stove.
~~~
Humanscape 62, 1970, by Melesio Casas 
Three years before I’d hear the word / beaner /
from the / white boys / who’d spit first in my broccoli,
then in my hair, / my mother / dressed me
each Wednesday in that / brown / sheath: I was seven.
It’d be the only time I’d wear a sash — 
Miss / America, / she said.
Twenty Miss / Americas, we made /
kitsch from clothespins, pipe cleaners — 
our / brown / socks / banded and complicated /
with orange tassels just below the / brown /
/ rosettes / of our knees, little / skulls / knocking
together in our elementary / school / cafeteria.
How we jumped the day / we heard / voices
raising there instead of / at home, / when Tracy’s
mom slapped our / troop / leader / and Tracy
cried. And Tracy’s / mom was white /
and only her / dad was brown / and Tracy
was a little / prettier than the rest of us. /
At the lunch tables, / white bitch / stuck to our fingers
like glue; / fucking Mexicans / landed like glitter
onto the sashes laid across our / small / hearts. /
With Tracy, / we watched / manifest between us
/ a line, / risen from the tiled floor where / we shared /
meals as tears clung to the eye-rims of my seven-year-old
/ compañeras. / Lorena chewed her nails till blood
/ bloomed / on her ring finger. Andrea peed quietly
/ on her brown knee / socks. None of us knew
where to hide. This was not / home, /
where / we could run / to the / broom / closet
or to the / feet / of our big / brothers. /
~~~
Cornel West makes the point that hope is different from American optimism. After the initial presidential election results come in, I stop watching the news. I want to continue watching, charting, and discussing the counts, the recounts, the hand counts, but I can­not. I lose hope. However Bush came to have won, he would still be winning ten days later and we would still be in the throes of our American optimism. All the non-reporting is a distraction from Bush himself, the same Bush who can't remember if two or three people were convicted for dragging a black man to his death in his home state of Texas.

/ 
 
You don't remember because you don't care. Some­times my mother's voice swells and fills my forehead. Mostly I resist the flooding, but in Bush's case I find myself talking to the television screen: You don't know because you don't care.
/
 
Then, like all things impassioned, this voice takes on a life of its own: You don't know because you don't bloody care. Do you?
/
 
I forget things too. It makes me sad. Or it makes me the saddest. The sadness is not really about George W. or our American optimism; the sadness lives in the recog­nition that a life can not matter. Or, as there are billions of lives, my sadness is alive alongside the recognition that billions of lives never mattered. I write this with­out breaking my heart, without bursting into anything. Perhaps this is the real source of my sadness. Or, per­haps, Emily Dickinson, my love, hope was never a thing with feathers. I don't know, I just find when the news comes on I switch the channel. This new ten­dency might be indicative of a deepening personality flaw: IMH, The Inability to Maintain Hope, which trans­lates into no innate trust in the supreme laws that gov­ern us. Cornel West says this is what is wrong with black people today—too nihilistic. Too scarred by hope to hope, too experienced to experience, too close to dead is what I think.
~~~
   for Alvester James



Long after it was
necessary, Uncle
Vess ate the leavings
off the hog, doused
them with vinegar sauce.
He ate chewy abominations.
Then came high pressure.
Then came the little pills.
Then came the doctor
who stole Vess’s second
sight, the predication
of pig’s blood every
fourth Sunday.
Then came the stillness
of barn earth, no more
trembling at his step.
Then came the end
of the rib, but before
his eyes clouded,
Uncle Vess wrote
down the gospel
of barbecue.Chapter one:
Somebody got to die
with something at some
time or another.Chapter two:
Don’t ever trust
white folk to cook
your meat until
it’s done to the bone.Chapter three:
December is the best
time for hog killing.
The meat won’t
spoil as quick.
Screams and blood
freeze over before
they hit the air.Chapter four, Verse one:
Great Grandma Mandy
used to say food
you was whipped
for tasted the best.Chapter four, Verse two:
Old Master knew to lock
the ham bacon chops
away quick or the slaves
would rob him blind.
He knew a padlock
to the smokehouse
was best to prevent
stealing, but even the
sorriest of slaves would
risk a beating for a full
belly. So Christmas time
he give his nasty
leftovers to the well
behaved. The head ears
snout tail fatback
chitlins feet ribs balls.
He thought gratitude
made a good seasoning.Chapter five:
Unclean means dirty
means filthy means
underwear worn too
long in summertime heat.
Perfectly good food
can’t be no sin.
Maybe the little
bit of meat on ribs
makes for lean eating.
Maybe the pink flesh
is tasteless until you add
onions garlic black
pepper tomatoes
soured apple cider
but survival ain’t never been
no crime against nature
or Maker. See, stay alive
in the meantime, laugh
a little harder. Go on
and gnaw that bone clean.
~~~
Two hundred seventy
Ghost Dancers died dreaming
That humanity would drown
In a flood of White sins.
Then the renewed earth
Would reclaim city and town,
Leaving only Ghost Dancers
And those who lived by nature’s laws.
History books say the threat is gone.
The Ghost Dance died with the ancestors—
Wovoka and his sacred dream
Were destroyed.
Each time it rains,
I go out to the sidewalk,
Where the tree roots
Have broken the concrete
Listening to the water’s whispering:
“It is coming soon.”
~~~
when i look at my life
i feel like bursting into tears
marriage
and mental illness
vintage washed
michael jackson graphic
spiritual disco grieving ritual
sell your body
to your horse-eyed past
little fictions
somebody got to sing
and somebody
got to play the squaw
last time i saw him
last time i saw my honey
buried your dead
lack of afro
exit wounds
cut off whole limbs
of generational desire
the death of cleopatra
hell or high water
get some fucking
love in your life girl
ghost chant
you’ve got to die
if you want to live
amidst and against 
the things we are 
rubbed into the cloth
wrapped around their faces
now white men
are black men too
the ways
we can’t say no
i call you queen
not as a term of endearment
but as a reminder
our histories meet
on the inside
we all be black moses
slave for the river
same river twice
sometimes
have to emphasize
the brown part
hey there beautiful brown girl
we don't usually change
until things are so painful
that we must
 
~~~
From a newspaper photo and article about my godfather, James Moreno, East Los Angeles, 1950.
       (Three police officers took a brutal beating in a wild free-for-all with a
              family, including three young girls.
       From left, James, 19, and Alex, 22, in jail after the fracas
       on the porch of their home at 3307 Hunter.)
       Jimmy is staring off the page, hands in his pockets.
       A four-button dark shirt. No bruises,
       but he looks dazed.
       Alex wears a leather coat and a polka-dot shirt,
       which is in itself a crime.
       Nowhere is there a photo of a young girl
       with a face carved like a racetrack saint,
       eyes with all bets called off,
       grinning like a coyote.
       (Officer Parks had his glasses broken
       with his own sap
       and was thrown through a window.)
       Jimmy and Alex are my dad’s cousins,
       lived on Boyle Heights and tortillas.
       Mama says the cops always harassed them, those niños
       from East L.A., driving their low-riders,
       chrome shinier than a cop’s badge.
       And why wasn’t Coyote Girl mentioned, that round-armed
       girl with a punch like a bag of bees,
       a girl with old eyes, her lips cracking open
       as she saw the cop sailing through glass, boiling out
       of Boyle Heights, skidding on the sidewalk, flat as a tortilla?
       (The officers received severe cuts and bruises,
       were treated at a hospital and released in time to jail the youths,
       who were charged with assault with a deadly weapon.)
       Two years later, I was born and Jimmy entered the church,
       hands in his pockets, shoulders hunched, watching the christening.
       Four drops of water, like popped-off wafer-thin buttons,
       fell on my head.
                   No.
       He never showed up that day
       or any other. My spiritual guardian must’ve been there
       in spirit only.
       He didn’t know nada about Got and no one knows
       where he is today, but I think you could find him at the end
       of a knife. Or in the slash of the z
       in ¡La Raza! the dark blood
       reds of graffiti. Or tomatoes
       grown in old coffee cans
       by a white-haired man
       sitting in the sun in a dark shirt,
       next to an old woman growing younger every day
       as I tell her story, my story,
       our story
       with all the grace and power
       of a deadly weapon.
~~~
June Jordan, 1936-2002



I.
The city where I knew you was swift.
A lover cabbed to Brooklyn
(broke, but so what) after the night shift
in a Second Avenue
diner. The lover was a Quaker,
a poet, an anti-war
activist. Was blonde, was twenty-four.
Wet snow fell on the access
road to the Manhattan Bridge. I was
neither lover, slept uptown.
But the arteries, streetlights, headlines,
phonelines, feminine plural
links ran silver through the night city
as dawn and the yellow cab
passed on the frost-blurred bridge, headed for
that day’s last or first coffee.
The city where I knew you was rich
in bookshops, potlucks, ad hoc
debates, demos, parades and picnics.
There were walks I liked to take.
I was on good terms with two rivers.
You turned, burned, flame-wheel of words
lighting the page, good neighbor on your
homely street in Park Slope, whose
Russian zaydes, Jamaican grocers,
dyke vegetarians, young
gifted everyone, claimed some changes
—at least a new food co-op.
In the laundromat, ordinary
women talked revolution.
We knew we wouldn’t live forever
but it seemed as if we could.
The city where I knew you was yours
and mine by birthright: Harlem,
the Bronx. Separately we left it
and came separately back.
There’s no afterlife for dialogue,
divergences we never
teased apart to weave back together.
Death slams down in the midst of
all your unfinished conversations.
Whom do I address when I
address you, larger than life as you
always were, not alive now?
Words are not you, poems are not you,
ashes on the Pacific
tide, you least of all. I talk to my-
self to keep the line open.
The city where I knew you is gone.
Pink icing roses spelled out
PASSION on a book-shaped chocolate cake.
The bookshop’s a sushi bar
now, and PASSION is long out of print.
We have a Republican
mayor. Threats keep citizens in line:
anthrax; suicide attacks.
A scar festers where towers once were;
dissent festers unexpressed.
You are dead of a woman’s disease.
Who gets to choose what battle
takes her down? Down to the ocean, friends
mourn you, with no time to mourn.
II.
You, who stood alone in the tall bay window
of a Brooklyn brownstone, conjuring morning
with free-flying words, knew the power, terror
in words, in flying;
knew the high of solitude while the early
light prowled Seventh Avenue, lupine, hungry
like you, your spoils raisins and almonds, ballpoint
pen, yellow foolscap.
You, who stood alone in your courage, never
hesitant to underline the connections
(between rape, exclusion and occupation...)
and separations
were alone and were not alone when morning
blotted the last spark of you out, around you
voices you no longer had voice to answer,
eyes you were blind to.
All your loves were singular: you scorned labels.
Claimed black; woman, and for the rest eluded
limits, quicksilver (Caribbean), staked out
self-definition.
Now your death, as if it were “yours”: your house, your
dog, your friends, your son, your serial lovers.
Death’s not “yours,” what’s yours are a thousand poems
alive on paper,
in the present tense of a thousand students’
active gaze at printed pages and blank ones
which you gave permission to blacken into
outrage and passion.
You, at once an optimist, a Cassandra,
Lilith in the wilderness of her lyric,
were a black American, born in Harlem,
citizen soldier
If you had to die—and I don’t admit it—
who dared “What if, each time they kill a black man /
we kill a cop?” couldn’t you take down with you
a few prime villains
in the capitol, who are also mortal?
June, you should be living, the states are bleeding.
Leaden words like “Homeland” translate abandoned
dissident discourse.
Twenty years ago, you denounced the war crimes
still in progress now, as Jenin, Rammallah
dominate, then disappear from the headlines.
Palestine: your war.
“To each nation, its Jews,” wrote Primo Levi.
“Palestinians are Jews to Israelis.”
Afterwards, he died in despair, or so we   
infer, despairing.
Top each nation its Jews, its blacks, its Arabs,
Palestinians, immigrants, its women.
From each nation, its poets: Mahmoud Darwish,
Kavanaugh, Shahid
(who, beloved witness for silenced Kashmir,
cautioned, shift the accent, and he was “martyr”),
Audre Lorde, Neruda, Amichai, Senghor,
and you, June Jordan.
~~~
Anna Kyle Brown. Osage.
1896-1921. Fairfax, Oklahoma.




Because she died where the ravine falls into water.
Because they dragged her down to the creek.
In death, she wore her blue broadcloth skirt.
Though frost blanketed the grass she cooled her feet in the spring.
Because I turned the log with my foot.
Her slippers floated downstream into the dam.
Because, after the thaw, the hunters discovered her body.
 
Because she lived without our mother.
Because she had inherited head rights for oil beneath the land.
She was carrying his offspring.
The sheriff disguised her death as whiskey poisoning.
Because, when he carved her body up, he saw the bullet hole in her skull.
Because, when she was murdered, the leg clutchers bloomed.
But then froze under the weight of frost.
During Xtha-cka Zhi-ga Tze-the, the Killer of the Flowers Moon.
I will wade across the river of the blackfish, the otter, the beaver.
I will climb the bank where the willow never dies.
~~~
Everything you thought you knew
must be relearned overnight.
 
How to walk.
Walk, not trip, over cords, 2x4s,
used coffee cups, concrete cores.
Walk, 40 pounds on your shoulder, across
rebar or a wood plank; glide,
not wobble, not look like the bounce
beneath each bootstep scares you.
 
How to dress yourself
to work outdoors all day midwinter
and keep warm, keep working, fingers moving;
or midsummer, with no hint of breasts.
 
How to climb ladders–
not a stepstool or a 4-footer–
ladders that stretch up two stories
where someone’s impatient
for that bundle of pipe.
 
How to get coffee–
hot and how they like it–to a crew
spread out 10 floors; to carry muffins
three blocks in a paper sack
through sheets of rain.
 
How to look.
To never go back empty-handed
when you’re told, Grab me a This/Thatfrom the gangbox, if all you’ve done
is move things around, poke here and there;
if you haven’t emptied out the full contents
so the journeyman won’t shame you
by finding This/That in a quick minute,
after you’ve said, We don’t have any. 
 
How to be dependable
but not predictable-provokable.
Not the lunch break entertainment.
 
How to read
blueprints,
delivery orders,
the mood on the job;
how long it’s okay to sit down for coffee;
how early you can start rolling up cords.
 
How to do well in school
from the back row
of a seats-assigned-Jim-Crow classroom
How to learn tricks-of-the-trade
from someone who does not like you.
 
How to listen, to act-don’t-ask.
To duck when someone motions, Duck! 
Or when someone tells you, Don’t talk to Zeke,
to know what they mean
so you don’t even look
at Zeke, the ironworker who’s always first out,
last in, standing there, so four times a day–
start, lunch, quit–all the workers walk past him,
like a sandbar, waves washing back and forth,
that catches debris.
 
How to pick up the phone and call your friend,
the only one of the women not at class
the night the apprenticeship director met you all
at the door
carrying the nervous rumor
that one of the women had been raped
and you all look at each other
and it wasn’t any of you five.
 
How to respond–within protocol–
when someone takes your ladder or tools,
imitates your voices on the loudspeaker,
spraypaints Cunt on your Baker staging,
urinates in your hardhat,
drives to your home
where you live alone
with your daughter
and keys your truck parked
in your own driveway.
 
Later, you’ll need the advanced skills:
how–without dislodging the keystone–
to humiliate a person, how to threaten
a person. Deftly.
So no one’s certain for absolute
that’s what happened. Not even you.
 
~~~
White people leave the express
at 96th Street, collectively,
like pigeons from a live wire
or hope from the hearts of Harlem.
And I’m one of them, although
my lover sleeps two stops north between
Malcolm X and Adam Clayton Powell
Boulevards, wishing my ass
were cupped inside her knees and belly,
wishing this in a dream thick
with inequalities.
 
I live on Riverside Drive. My face
helped get me here. I was
ruddy with anticipation the day
I interviewed for the rooms
near the park with its
snow-covered maples. I was full
of undisguised hope as I
strolled along the river, believing
I belonged there, that my people
inherited this wonderland
unequivocally, as if they deserved it.
 
My lover buys twinkies from the Arabs,
bootleg tapes on ‘25th,
and carries a blade in her back
pocket although her hands
are the gentlest I’ve known.
She ignores the piss smells
on the corner, the sirens
at 4 A.M., the men whose brains
have dissolved in rum. And tries
to trust a white woman who
sleeps near the trees of Riverside.
 
When we go out together,
we avoid expensive
cafés on Columbus Avenue, jaunts
to the Upper East Side. Harlem
eyes us suspiciously or with
contempt beneath half-closed lids.
We have friends there,
hidden in the ruins like gold, who
accept us. When it snows,
we walk boldly anywhere, as if the snow
were a protection, or a death.
~~~
There  is a  sorceress in our night.  A  sky  that  only  moves  memory to make
place  for  the  mangoes of last month.  There is an old man who says,  Libéremoi.  And  means,  Take  everything   but  my  blackness.  Only  in the dark do
doves  find   reason.  Only  in  the  dark  do  doves  have  reason to believe that
vengeance  is  light  hanging  on  fallen  tree.  After each  fall, we  ask, where is
the   island,   the  sugarcane  that  disappeared  in  our hunger,  the  water that
emptied  our  thirst,  the  song   that  robbed  our  nightmare?   They  mock  us.
They  tell  us to  whisper in their ears.  They will obey.  But  curses  beat  the air
wild.  The air is faint.  And they tell us, Stop plotting fire. You are in the wrongland even if the roosters recognize you. They hated our black. What they didn't
understand is that it illuminates their world.
~~~
is surely a peculiar answer for any teacher to receive when
asking a kindergartner, but on second take, what word best
describes me, crossbreed of butterfly and Super Fly aesthetics,
other than peculiar? I suppose calling me a keen kid would
also suffice in explaining my avidity for the kind of death that
progresses the narrative of a gentling history, because that’s
the only frame for greatness I seem to find for boys my shade
and age to aspire to, short of having the height and hops to
touch the rim, or the bulk and burst to break through the
defensive line like a bullet.And, no, I haven’t given up
on the prospect of Bulls starting shooting guard yet, but
the God-fearer impressed upon me begs the mythology of
goodness delivered to the multitudes like loaves and fish;how King is talked about in a black Christian tradition stillin mourning over his lost rays of light, the way mentioningthe name of Malcolm makes mice of shady white men some
thirty years after the shotgun and he’s sung of as a prince:
I want to evoke that level of pride in American democracy’s
dark downtrodden because I know what it invokes in me,
young and impressionable, watching Denzel’s mimicry
for the one millionth time in my abbreviated existence — 
drawing an X on my undeveloped chest, pushing it out
into the unknown-ahead hoping a Mecca for melanin rises
from the man-shaped hole I’d left in my loved ones’ lives.I bet my parents would be so proud of me.
I bet post offices would close on my birthday.
I bet God would dap me upwhen I got up there and Jesus — dying on a cross to meet me.
~~~
When I boarded the plane, everyone looked like Uncle Tomruddy, some were empurpledgray hair or auburn in terrier thatchespale blue of eyea smidgen of resignation:the tribe.I thought We are driving to the interiorI thought holy godthe airline upholsterywas Yeats, Kavanagh and Heaneyhandwriting. I thoughtholy shit, this is the maw.The maw.
~~~
i was leaving my fifty-eighth year
when a thumb of ice
stamped itself hard near my heart
you have your own story
you know about the fears the tears
the scar of disbelief
you know that the saddest lies
are the ones we tell ourselves
you know how dangerous it is
to be born with breasts
you know how dangerous it is
to wear dark skin
i was leaving my fifty-eighth year
when i woke into the winter
of a cold and mortal body
thin icicles hanging off
the one mad nipple weeping
have we not been good children
did we not inherit the earth
but you must know all about this
from your own shivering life
~~~
Angels don’t come to the reservation.
Bats, maybe, or owls, boxy mottled things.
Coyotes, too. They all mean the same thing—
death. And death
eats angels, I guess, because I haven’t seen an angel
fly through this valley ever.
Gabriel? Never heard of him. Know a guy named Gabe though—
he came through here one powwow and stayed, typical
Indian. Sure he had wings,
jailbird that he was. He flies around in stolen cars. Wherever he stops,
kids grow like gourds from women’s bellies.
Like I said, no Indian I’ve ever heard of has ever been or seen an angel.
Maybe in a Christmas pageant or something—
Nazarene church holds one every December,
organized by Pastor John’s wife. It’s no wonder
Pastor John’s son is the angel—everyone knows angels are white.
Quit bothering with angels, I say. They’re no good for Indians.
Remember what happened last time
some white god came floating across the ocean?
Truth is, there may be angels, but if there are angels
up there, living on clouds or sitting on thrones across the sea wearing
velvet robes and golden rings, drinking whiskey from silver cups,
we’re better off if they stay rich and fat and ugly and
’xactly where they are—in their own distant heavens.
You better hope you never see angels on the rez. If you do, they’ll be marching you off to
Zion or Oklahoma, or some other hell they’ve mapped out for us.
~~~
I
However the image enters
its force remains within
my eyes
rockstrewn caves where dragonfish evolve   
wild for life, relentless and acquisitive   
learning to survive
where there is no food
my eyes are always hungry
and remembering
however the image enters
its force remains.
A white woman stands bereft and empty
a black boy hacked into a murderous lesson   
recalled in me forever
like a lurch of earth on the edge of sleep   
etched into my visions
food for dragonfish that learn
to live upon whatever they must eat
fused images beneath my pain.
    II
The Pearl River floods through the streets of Jackson   
A Mississippi summer televised.
Trapped houses kneel like sinners in the rain
a white woman climbs from her roof to a passing boat   
her fingers tarry for a moment on the chimney   
now awash
tearless and no longer young, she holds   
a tattered baby's blanket in her arms.
In a flickering afterimage of the nightmare rain   
a microphone
thrust up against her flat bewildered words
          “we jest come from the bank yestiddy   
                   borrowing money to pay the income tax   
                   now everything's gone. I never knew   
                   it could be so hard.”
Despair weighs down her voice like Pearl River mud   
caked around the edges
her pale eyes scanning the camera for help or explanation
unanswered
she shifts her search across the watered street, dry-eyed   
                   “hard, but not this hard.”
Two tow-headed children hurl themselves against her   
hanging upon her coat like mirrors
until a man with ham-like hands pulls her aside   
snarling “She ain't got nothing more to say!”
and that lie hangs in his mouth
like a shred of rotting meat.
    III
I inherited Jackson, Mississippi.
For my majority it gave me Emmett Till   
his 15 years puffed out like bruises   
on plump boy-cheeks
his only Mississippi summer
whistling a 21 gun salute to Dixie
as a white girl passed him in the street   
and he was baptized my son forever   
in the midnight waters of the Pearl.
His broken body is the afterimage of my 21st year
when I walked through a northern summer
my eyes averted
from each corner's photographies   
newspapers protest posters magazines   
Police Story, Confidential, True   
the avid insistence of detail
pretending insight or information
the length of gash across the dead boy's loins
his grieving mother's lamentation   
the severed lips, how many burns   
his gouged out eyes
sewed shut upon the screaming covers   
louder than life
all over
the veiled warning, the secret relish   
of a black child's mutilated body   
fingered by street-corner eyes   
bruise upon livid bruise
and wherever I looked that summer
I learned to be at home with children's blood
with savored violence
with pictures of black broken flesh   
used, crumpled, and discarded   
lying amid the sidewalk refuse   
like a raped woman's face.
A black boy from Chicago
whistled on the streets of Jackson, Mississippi
testing what he'd been taught was a manly thing to do
his teachers
ripped his eyes out his sex his tongue
and flung him to the Pearl weighted with stone
in the name of white womanhood
they took their aroused honor
back to Jackson
and celebrated in a whorehouse
the double ritual of white manhood
confirmed.
    IV
    “If earth and air and water do not judge them who are
      we to refuse a crust of bread?”
~~~
The day upturned, flooded with sunlight, nota single cloud. I squint into the glare,cautious even then of bright emptiness.We sit under shade, Tía Luciashowing me how white folks dine, the high life.I am about to try my first oyster,Tía spending her winnings from the slotson a whole dozen, the glistening valveswet and private as a cheek’s other side, broken open before us. Don’t be shy.Take it all in at once. Flesh and sea grit,sweet meat and brine, a taste I must acquire. In every split shell, the coast’s silhouette: bodies floating in what was once their home.
~~~
Eat cereal. Read the back of the box over and over. Put on my red velvet jumper with white heart shaped buttons. Walk to the bus, pick up discarded cigarette butts and pretend to smoke.
 
Get on the bus. Girls yell, Wire head, ugly black skin. Take a window seat, under the radio speaker. Look for cats hunting in the fields.
 
Go to class. Stay in at recess. Steal chewing gum, plastic green monkeys and cookies from desks. Eat in bathroom stalls. Pure white light pours in.
 
Try to get a bloody nose by punching myself in the same bathroom after lunch.
 
The teacher passes around pictures of herself pregnant. You were fat! I yell.  Everyone laughs. I lap it like licking honey from a spoon. I was pregnant, what’s your excuse? Everyone laughs. I swallow stones.
 
Grow tired in the afternoons, droop like a sunflower in the lengthening light.
 
Get on the bus. Girls yell, Brillo-head! Zebra! Sit in an aisle seat. Your father’s a nigger! I say, No, he’s a fireman. Laughter all around. Pinch myself shut like squeezing soap from a sponge.
 
Walk home. Sometimes find an unsmoked cigarette in the gravel along the curb—long, white, new. Put it to my lips, pull it away and hold it aloft, movie-star-like, all the way home.
~~~
We tell the story every year—
how we peered from the windows, shades drawn—
though nothing really happened,
the charred grass now green again.
 
We peered from the windows, shades drawn,
at the cross trussed like a Christmas tree,
the charred grass still green. Then
we darkened our rooms, lit the hurricane lamps.
 
At the cross trussed like a Christmas tree,
a few men gathered, white as angels in their gowns.
We darkened our rooms and lit hurricane lamps,
the wicks trembling in their fonts of oil.
 
It seemed the angels had gathered, white men in their gowns.
When they were done, they left quietly. No one came.
The wicks trembled all night in their fonts of oil;
by morning the flames had all dimmed.
 
When they were done, the men left quietly. No one came.
Nothing really happened.
By morning all the flames had dimmed.
We tell the story every year.
~~~
When I was a child I knew red miners
dressed raggedly and wearing carbide lamps.
I saw them come down red hills to their camps
dyed with red dust from old Ishkooda mines.
Night after night I met them on the roads,
or on the streets in town I caught their glance;
the swing of dinner buckets in their hands,
and grumbling undermining all their words.
I also lived in low cotton country
where moonlight hovered over ripe haystacks,
or stumps of trees, and croppers’ rotting shacks
with famine, terror, flood, and plague near by;
where sentiment and hatred still held sway
and only bitter land was washed away.
~~~
In the United terminal in Chicago at five on a Friday afternoonThe sky is breaking with rain and wind and all the flightsAre delayed forever. We will never get to where we are goingAnd there’s no way back to where we’ve been.The sun and the moon have disappeared to an island far from  anywhere.Everybody has a heartache — The immense gatekeeper of Gate Z–100 keeps his cool.This guardian of the sky teases me and makes me smile through the mess,Building up his airline by stacking it against the company I usually travel:Come on over to our side, we’ll treat you nice.I laugh as he hands me back my ticket, then he turns to charmThe next customer, his feet tired in his minimum wage shoes.Everybody has a heartache — The man with his head bobbing to music no one else can hear has that satisfiedFeel — a full belly of sweet and a wife who sings heartache to sleep.In his luggage (that will be lost and never found) is a musty dream of flyingSolo to Africa, with a stop on the return to let go the stories too difficult toCarry home. He’ll take off his shoes to walk in a warm, tropical sea.He’ll sing to the ancestors:Take me home to mama. No one cooks like her.But all the mamas worked to the bone gone too young. Broken by The Man.Everybody has a heartache —  Everyone’s mouthing fried, sweet, soft and fat,While we wait for word in the heart of the scrambled beast.The sparkle of soda wets the dream core.That woman over there the color of broth did what she was told.It’s worked out well as can be expected in a worldWhere she was no beauty queen and was never seen,Always in the back of someplace in the back — She holds the newest baby. He has croup.Shush, shush. Go to sleep, my little baby sheepie.He sits up front of her with his new crop of teeth.Everybody has a heartache — This man speaks to no one, but his body does.Half his liver is swollen with anger; the other half is tryingTo apologize — What a mess I’ve made of history, he thinks without thinking.Mother coming through the screen door, her clothes torn,Whimpering: It’s okay baby, please don’t cry.Don’t cry. Baby don’t cry.
~~~
All this time I've been looking for words for certain difficult womenbecause they aren't able to speak for themselves, and now theClinton Foundation has come up with a brilliant campaign—theydecided, for International Women's Day, through digital magic to erase women on the cover of Condé Nast, posters, billboards, thosefigures replaced by empty space because women have not yet achievedgender equity, as noted on a website, not-there.org, and they're right. Wehaven't. But when I read about not-there.org and saw its flashy graphics,I wasn't thinking about how women are not-there-yet, metaphorically, I just thought about women who are really not there, women and girls whokeep disappearing (not from magazines, who don't make news in Manhattan)like they've evaporated, like illusions, hundreds in Juárez, twelve hundred missing and murdered Native women across Canada. The hands of men.Now you see her. Not. Not-there. Not here, either,or anywhere. Maybe only part of the problem is the predatory perpetrator-prestidigitator who more often than not knows her, knows how to keep herquiet, who may claim to love her, even, maybe getting even—or the serialrapist-killer in the bushes who bushwhacks her in the dark. You're always safe,says the forensic psychiatrist, unless a monster happens to show up, andthen you're not. Not-there. Maybe a lonely mandible, maxilla, fibula, or ulna shows up, or a bagged body gets dragged from the river. Or not. Is this thevalue we permit a woman's life to have (or not-have) throughout a wrongworld, a global idea of her as disposable parts? In the end, this is not a xenophobic poem, not specific—it's everywhere. Not-there. Right here.Yes, the sun rises anyway, but now the parents are staring past each other, thatzero between them like a chalked outline in their family photograph. Or not.
 
~~~
Newsmen call it the Cuban Missile Crisis.
Teachers say it's the end of the world.
At school, they instruct us to look up
and watch the Cuban-cursed sky.
Search for a streak of light.
Listen for a piercing shriek,
the whistle that will warn us
as poisonous A-bombs
zoom close.
Hide under a desk.
Pretend that furniture is enough
to protect us against perilous flames.
Radiation. Contamination. Toxic breath.
Each air-raid drill is sheer terror,
but some of the city kids giggle.
They don't believe that death
is real.
They've never touched a bullet,
or seen a vulture, or made music
by shaking
the jawbone
of a mule.
When I hide under my frail school desk,
my heart grows as rough and brittle
as the slab of wood
that fails to protect me
from reality's
gloom.
~~~
For Don (1958–2011)



My skiff is made of spicewood       my oars are Cassia bractMusic flows      from bow to starboard Early Mozart     cool side of  Coltrane   and miles and miles     of   Miles Cheap Californian Merlot       and my young boyfriend • If   I could master      the nine doors of my bodyAnd close my heart       to the cries of   sufferingPerhaps     I could love you like no otherFloat my mind      toward the other side of   hate• The shanty towns of   Tijuana       sing for youThe slums of   Little Sudan       hold evening prayerOne dead brown boy is a tragedy     Ten thousand is a statistic So let’s fuck    my love       until the dogs pass• All beautiful boyfriends are transitoryThey have no souls     they’re shiny brown fleshTomorrow they’ll turn into      purple festering corpsesFissured     gored    by a myriad flies• Down the Irrawaddy River       you lay yourself   to sleepNo sun no moon          no coming no goingNo causality   no personalityNo hunger     no thirst• Malarial deltas      typhoidal caysTsunamis don’t judge     Calamity grieves no oneThe poor will be submerged     the rich won’t be savedPurge the innocent     sink the depraved• What do I smell        but the perfume of   transienceCrushed calyxes         rotting phloemsLet’s write     pretty poems        pretty poems      pretty poemsMasque stale pogroms    with a sweet whiff of oblivion