
~~~
In green water I saw your eye and in it I saw that Arabian palace
filled with birds and broken glass.
                                                                  I copy an address into my right hand
and fill myself with memories of psalms.
A green fish emerges from seaweed as seaweed from a wave
                                                                  that rises like the wailing wall.
My sun-baked body at the edge,
wind in my lungs, its whistle,
my torn world, my grief,
my soggy passport, my shell with no pearl,
you lift them, delicate cloud, into a liquid world.
Last night I dreamed of my father's flabby body and of my blue
resolve to run away, to find a way, I dreamed of your eye
                                                            and for an instant I found the vertex of the road,
the imaginary line that falls across the earth:
               that meridian where the sun on a tiger's back meets the shade at its belly.
Waking up, we are swallowed by wakefulness.
The house swallows us in its terrible thirst. The routine of taking our children
to school swallows us
                                                   and so does the if only I could.
There was something to that dream. You know it. A direction. A way.
                                                                   A forest as green as you and your roots.
Give me your premonitions, give me your book, give me your prodigious memory,
give me the blue gaze from your dark eye, give me the devotion of your sleeping birds.
Sometimes the way is a fire
through which the circus tiger
                                                           leaps, a perfect circle
                                                                           returning to me with its stripes intact
and with the endless continuity of this ineluctably feral world.
~~~
When I beeheld the Image of my deere    With greedy lookes mine eyes would that way bend,    Fear, and desire did inwardly contend;    Feare to bee mark’d, desire to drawe still neere,And in my soule a speritt wowld apeer,    Which boldnes waranted, and did pretend    To bee my genius, yett I durst nott lend    My eyes in trust wher others seemed soe cleere,Then did I search from whence this danger ’rose,    If such unworthynes in mee did rest    As my sterv’d eyes must nott with sight bee blest;    When jealousie her poyson did disclose;Yett in my hart unseense of jealous eyeThe truer Image shall in triumph lye.
~~~
It snakes behind me, this invisible chain gang—
the aliases, your many faces peopling
that vast hotel, the past. What did we learn?
Every twenty minutes the elevated train,
the world shuddering beyond
the pane. It was never warm enough in winter.
The walls peeled, the color of corsages
ruined in the air. Sweeping the floor,
my black wig on the chair. I never meant
to leave you in that hotel where the voices
of patrons long gone seemed to echo in the halls,
a scent of spoiled orchids. But this was never
an elegant hotel. The iron fretwork of the El
held each room in a deep corrosive bloom.
This was the bankrupt’s last chance, the place
the gambler waits to learn his black mare’s
leg snapped as she hurtled towards the finish line.
* * *
How did we live? Your face over my shoulder
was the shade of mahogany in the speckled
mirror bolted to the wall. It was never warm.
You arrived through a forest of needles,
the white mist of morphine, names for sleep
that never came. My black wig unfurled
across the battered chair. Your arms circled me
when I stood by the window. Downstairs
the clerk who read our palms broke the seal
on another deck of cards. She said you’re my fate,
my sweet annihilating angel, every naked hotel room
I’ve ever checked out of. There’s nothing
left of that, but even now when night pulls up
like a limousine, sea-blue, and I’m climbing the stairs,
keys in hand, I’ll reach the landing and
you’re there—the one lesson I never get right.
Trains hurtled by, extinguished somewhere
past the bend of midnight. The shuddering world.
Your arms around my waist. I never meant to leave.
* * *
Of all that, there's nothing left but a grid
of shadows the El tracks throw over the street,
the empty lot. Gone, the blistered sills,
voices that rilled across each wall. Gone,
the naked bulb swinging from the ceiling,
that chicanery of light that made your face
a brief eclipse over mine. How did we live?
The mare broke down. I was your fate, that
yellow train, the plot of sleet, through dust
crusted on the pane. It wasn't warm enough.
What did we learn? All I have left of you
is this burnt place on my arm. So, I won't
forget you even when I'm nothing but
small change in the desk clerk's palm, nothing
but the pawn ticket crumpled in your pocket,
the one you'll never redeem. Whatever I meant
to say loses itself in the bend of winter
towards extinction, this passion of shadows falling
like black orchids through the air. I never meant
to leave you there by the pane, that
terminal hotel, the world shuddering with trains.
~~~
When everything finally has been wrecked and further shipwrecked,
When their most ardent dream has been made hollow and unrecognizable,
They will feel inside their limbs the missing shade of blue that lingers
Against hills in the cooler hours before dark, and the moss at the foot of the forest
When green starts to leave it. What they take into their privacy (half of his embrace,
Her violence at play) are shadows of acts which have no farewells in them.
Moons unearth them. And when, in their separate dwellings, their bodies
Feel the next season come, they no longer have anyone to whom
To tell it. Clouds of reverie pass outside the window and a strange emptiness
Peers back in. If they love, it is solely to be adored, it is to scatter and gather
Themselves like hard seeds in a field made fallow by a fire someone years ago set.
In the quiet woods, from the highest trees, there is always something
Weightless falling; and he, who must realize that certain losses are irreparable,
Tells himself at night, before the darkest mirror, that vision keeps him whole.
On the verge of warm and simple sleep they tell themselves certain loves
Are like sheets of dark water, or ice forests, or husks of ships. To stop a thing
Such as this would be to halve a sound that travels out from a silent person’s
Thoughts. The imprint they make on each other’s bodies is worth any pain
They may have caused. Quiet falls around them. And when she reaches
For him the air greens like underwater light and the well-waters drop.
They will see again the shadows of insects.
They will touch the bark and feel each age of the tree fly undisturbed
Into them. If what is no longer present in them cannot be restored,
It can at least be offered. Through long bewildered dusks, stalks grow;
Rains fill and pass out of clouds; animals hover at the edges of fields
With eyes like black pools. For nothing cannot be transformed;
Pleasure and failure feed each other daily. Do not think any breeze,
Any grain of light, shall be withheld. All the stars will sail out for them.
~~~
On our first trip to the beach together I cut my foot on sharp rocks lining the shore and watched the ocean lick the crimson clean off, the salt on my tongue a slight distraction from the deep blue, the wide open, the playground sting. I’m sorry my flesh is softer than it has to be, my skin thinner than yours. I’m sorry there are parts of me I have scrubbed raw, hurt; I only wanted to be polished, untainted, good

as new. I’m sorry I didn’t see the waves crashing, didn’t see any of this coming; I’m sorry I wasn’t careful, or strong. When the sea soaked up my blood that day I thought maybe it needed to drink too, needed to kiss, needed to need. I thought maybe you had always been right — when you drain my body of tears you also drain it of salt and dust so that you can shrink me down two sizes smaller and I can fit neatly into your life without taking up too much space, so that you can carry me with you wherever you go, to cities and mountains and valleys and all the oceans

you’ve never explored. Tell me, please, if you find something. Tell me if you need me to search, too. Tell me if there are places you still have to visit, things you still have to unearth. Tell me if there’s any way to love you, deep blue and wide open, soft and scrubbed and thin, flesh and skin, shrinking bones, raw parts, any way at all, without letting myself bleed.
shallow body, 2014 by Caitlin Hazell
~~~
What do I owe to you        
 Who loved me deep and long? You never gave my spirit wings  
 Nor gave my heart a song.   But oh, to him I loved,        
 Who loved me not at all, I owe the little open gate  
 That led through heaven’s wall.
~~~
Taking on an aspect of the Orient,
Skies full of hatchets and oranges
Love, uninvited, hangs in the blood:
But what is a kingdom to a dying emperor?
 
Skies full of hatchets and oranges
Keep the birds singing, sorrows fresh—
But what is a kingdom to a dying emperor,
As the nights grow steadily into mountains.
 
Keep the birds singing, sorrows fresh—
The princess braids these into a necklace
As the nights grow steadily into mountains,
Why, even regrets recede unexpectedly.
 
The princess braids these into a necklace:
Roads and rivers that lead away from the palace.
Why, even regrets recede unexpectedly
In a solitude full of wars and songs.
 
Roads and rivers that lead away from the palace
Never converge in that vast landscape;
In a solitude full of wars and songs,
The words remain light and fugitive.
 
Never converge in that vast landscape
In the way that stars keep their distance.
The words remain light and fugitive
In an anticipation crossed with absence.
In the way that stars keep their distance,
Love, uninvited, hangs in the blood
In an anticipation crossed with absence,
Taking on an aspect of the Orient.
~~~
What we built to hold us, the year's memory,menus and daytrips, after a whilecame loose. Those nightswe balanced on each other's mistakes,cradling our wine:twigs those branches now.Who knew what lived there?She she she called one bird.What lived there knew its place.Another bird splits its nest wide,hinges the gap with spider silk, learningto give, to give, to give until breaking. Only then—either one gives until breaking or one does not.
~~~
How solitary
and resolute you look in the morning.
A stoic in your cotton sleeve.
Do you dream of walking out
rain or shine
a truffle balanced on your sternum
and passing me on the sidewalk?
Or is that a smile
because you interpret nothing
and statelessness is where you live?
How calmly you indulge my moods.
See you tonight, by the sovereign chartreuse
ceramics at the Met.
Let's hear what you'd do differently.
~~~
If thou must love me, let it be for nought Except for love's sake only. Do not say I love her for her smile ... her look ... her way Of speaking gently, ... for a trick of thought That falls in well with mine, and certes brought A sense of pleasant ease on such a day'— For these things in themselves, Belovèd, may Be changed, or change for thee,—and love, so wrought, May be unwrought so. Neither love me for Thine own dear pity's wiping my cheeks dry,— A creature might forget to weep, who bore Thy comfort long, and lose thy love thereby! But love me for love's sake, that evermore Thou may'st love on, through love's eternity.
~~~
I thought once how Theocritus had sung Of the sweet years, the dear and wished for years, Who each one in a gracious hand appears To bear a gift for mortals, old or young: And, as I mused it in his antique tongue, I saw, in gradual vision through my tears, The sweet, sad years, the melancholy years, Those of my own life, who by turns had flung A shadow across me. Straightway I was 'ware, So weeping, how a mystic Shape did move Behind me, and drew me backward by the hair, And a voice said in mastery, while I strove, ... Guess now who holds thee?'—Death,' I said. But there, The silver answer rang ... Not Death, but Love.'
~~~
Nothing is nothing, although
he would call me that, she was nothing.
Those were his words, but his hand was lifting
cigarettes in chains and bridges
of ash-light. He said he didn't want his body to last.
It wasn't a year I could argue
against that kind of talk, so I cut the fowl
killed on the farm a mile out—brown and silvery, wild—
and put it over butter lettuce, lettuce then lime.
I heated brandy in the saucepan, poured a strip of molasses
slowly through the cold, slow as I'd seen
a shaman pour pine tincture over the floor
of my beaten house.
She seemed to see my whole life
by ordinance of some god
who wanted me alive again.
Burnt sage, blue smoke. Then sea salt shaken
into the corners of violent sadness.
She wrote my address
across her chest
to let everything listening know
where my life was made.
We waited, either forgetting what we were
or becoming more brightly human in that pine,
in her trance, in the lavender I set on the chipped sills,
not a trance at all but my deliberate hand cutting
from the yard part of what she required.
Now wait longer, she said, and I did as I would
when the molasses warmed over the pot enough
to come into the brandy,
to come into the night
begun by small confessions—
that this was just a rental, and mine just a floor,
that the woman he loved was with another man,
his mother mad, his apartment haunted in the crawl space.
Then I told of the assault at daybreak between
the houses. Heat, asphalt, all of it and my face toward
the brick school where the apostolate studied first-century script
and song. There must have been chanting,
as it was on the hour.
What we said was liturgy meant only for us
and for that night. Not for anyone else
to repeat, live by, believe. Never that.
Our only theories were inside of our hands,
flesh and land, body and prairie.
I reached to smoke down his next-to-last,
which he lit and made ready.
The poultry like a war ration
we ate all the way through.
What we wished, we said.
What we said, we found that night
by these, and no other,
means.
 
~~~
He dwelt among “apartments let,”       About five stories high; A man I thought that none would get,       And very few would try. A boulder, by a larger stone       Half hidden in the mud, Fair as a man when only one       Is in the neighborhood. He lived unknown, and few could tell       When Jacob was not free; But he has got a wife,—and O!       The difference to me!
~~~
This song is not a language,
Not a thing to be remembered,
The field-holler tradition of
Teeth and knees
Cursing wind,
A concert hall of   bloody hands
Spilling the earth,
Strangling dirt,
Sledgehammer curses
Of  men busted open.
On Parchman Farm
You could hear it coming
Up through the trees,
The hammering pulpit of
Crooning men and sweat,
The tender meat of palms
Pulped like plums.
Them men gulped down the
Dawn dew air,
Let it catch in their throats,
Broke the sunrise up and
Sang hymns like hexes:Be my woman gal, I’ll beeee your maaaaaaan    ...    
And the killing fields of  Mississippi
Fizzled down to juke joints and
The hothouse music of illegal clubs
With thick women they loved outright and
Played cards with and
Gave bourbon to when their hands
Didn’t hold sorrow like
Pickaxes and the railroad was
Just a railroad,
A way to ride north if  you could
Get your money right.
Redbone gals with rosewater sweat,
When they lifted their knees
Sunflower County was a heaven
They believed in.Stick to the promise, gal, that you maaaaaade meeeeee    ...    
Steady now,
They turned back the clock on
Their hard, hard hands,
Let the memory of fresh linen and
Ladies’ slips like gossamer
Wings, a parade of  plump thighs,
The juju thrust of  furious bones
Spread like grease
Across starched-white sheets,
Midwife them out of ol’ Parchman Farm
And back to the cockfights and gambling,
Back when they had ambition,
Back when they had a sweet woman
To hold, her fat wrists
Soft as butter,
Limp as rain.When she walk, she reel and rock beeeeeehind
Ain’t that enough to make a convict smiiiiiiiiile.
~~~
The man moves earth  to dispel grief. He digs holes the size of cars. In proportion to what is taken  what is given multiplies— rain-swollen ponds and dirt mounds rooted with flame-tipped flowers. He carries trees like children  struggling to be set down.  Trees that have lived out their lives, he cuts and stacks like loaves of bread which he will feed the fire.  The green smoke sweetens  his house. The woman sweeps air to banish sadness.  She dusts floors,  polishes objects made of clay and wood. In proportion to what is taken what is given multiplies— the task of something  else to clean. Gleaming appliances  beg to be smudged, breathed upon by small children and large animals  flicking out hope  as she whirls by,  flap of tongue, scratch of paw, sweetly reminding her. The man moves earth,  the woman sweeps air.  Together they pull water  out of the other, pull with the muscular  ache of the living, hauling from the deep  well of the body the rain-swollen, the flame-tipped, the milk-fed— all that cycles through lives moving,  lives sweeping, water  circulating between them  like breath, drawn out of leaves by light.
~~~
Falling in love with a mustache
is like saying
you can fall in love with
the way a man polishes his shoes
                which,
                of course,
                is one of the things that turns on
                my tuned-up engine
                those trim buckled boots
                (I feel like an advertisement
                for men’s fashions
                when I think of your ankles)
Yeats was hung up with a girl’s beautiful face
and I find myself
a bad moralist,
a failing aesthetician,
a sad poet,
wanting to touch your arms and feel the muscles
that make a man’s body have so much substance,
that makes a woman
lean and yearn in that direction
that makes her melt/ she is a rainy day
in your presence
the pool of wax under a burning candle
the foam from a waterfall
You are more beautiful than any Harley-Davidson
She is the rain,
waits in it for you,
finds blood spotting her legs
from the long ride.
~~~
Eight stars make A soft solfege  Above this motel Where there are never  Stars. I let a skinny man  Put his long thick dick in me for you So we could break our hearts  The way you want me to. Somewhere a white Wall stretches up behind the backs of a tribe  Whose obscurity protects its secret from the common World and the connivances it ordains.  What time is it. What season is it. I don’t know.  The moon blows green Gas into my skull  I want to hide what I dream In a big boot, and wear the boot  And starve as I lean upon the boot of my destitution And drag  The truth as a gimp would drag the weight of her body. That would give me a feeling of honesty.
~~~
In different cities, on different
forms of transportation, a woman read Daniel Deronda
until the year became the arbitrary pink
the calendar chose for the middle of winter.
And finally she sat in the reference section
of the public library finishing Daniel Deronda
for days at a slowing pace between piecesof newspapers and foreign language newspaperswhose syntax she enjoyed, not understanding.And when she didn't anymore she wrote in the marginsof Daniel Deronda for someonewho might never see. Thought of that personwho might never see, staring equally at the rain, equallythinking of her and of nothing in particular.Outside the news fell apart. If one choosesto be shallow or noble, or oneis born so, and if it matters. Translationsare appropriate when Nature is dormant, or when onehas nothing to say, or does not knowwhat to say. These are three different thingsbut sometimes they are the same.It is not wrong to want nice things, neitheris it wrong to want to be good, or to feel thatas a physical force of pleasure: Daniel Deronda,who does not know who he is,who thinks he does, and goes away on a boat.But the cover is a picture of a woman gambling.The air warms outside the referencesection, and also the rain. Incomprehensible news.Whenever a book ends, silence, as if a stewardship had ceased.A person can feel the bones of one's hands by stretching them.If love comes again, know better than to speak.
~~~
Love like a jugler, comes to play his prise,    And all minds draw his wonders to admire,    To see how cuningly hee, wanting eyes,    Can yett deseave the best sight of desire: The wanton child, how hee can faine his fire    So pretely, as none sees his disguise!    How finely doe his tricks, while wee fooles hire    The badge, and office of his tirannies,For in the end, such jugling hee doth make    As hee our harts, in stead of eyes doth take    For men can only by theyr slieghts abuseThe sight with nimble, and delightful skill;    Butt if hee play, his gaine is our lost will:    Yett childlike, wee can nott his sports refuse.
~~~
When we talk about when to tell the kids,we are so together, so concentrated.I mutter, “I feel like a killer.” “I’mthe killer”—taking my wrist—he says,holding it. He is sitting on the couch, the old indigo chintz around him, rich as a night sea with jellies, I am sitting on the floor. I look up at him,as if within some chamber of matedness,some dust I carry around me. Tonight,to breathe its Magellanic field is lesspainful, maybe because he is drinkinga wine grown where I was born—fog,eucalyptus, sempervirens—and I’msharing the glass with him. “Don’t catchmy cold,” he says, “—oh that’s right, you wantto catch my cold.” I should not have told him that,I tell him I will try to fall out of love with him, but I feel I will love himall my life. He says he loves meas the mother of our children, and new troupesof tears mount to the acrobat platformsof my ducts and do their burning leaps.Some of them jump straight sideways, and, for amoment, I imagine a flurryof tears like a whirra of knives thrownat a figure, to outline it—a heart’s spurt of rage. It glitters, in my vision, I nodto it, it is my hope.
~~~
Why, Damon, why, why, why so pressing?The Heart you beg’s not worth possessing:Each Look, each Word, each Smile’s affected,And inward Charms are quite neglected:
  Then scorn her, scorn her, foolish Swain,
  And sigh no more, no more in vain.Beauty’s worthless, fading, flying;Who would for Trifles think of dying?Who for a Face, a Shape, wou’d languish,And tell the Brooks, and Groves his Anguish,
  Till she, till she thinks fit to prize him,
  And all, and all beside despise him?Fix, fix your Thoughts on what’s inviting,On what will never bear the slighting:Wit and Virtue claim your Duty,They’re much more worth than Gold and Beauty:
  To them, to them, your Heart resign,
  And you’ll no more, no more repine.
~~~
Periyar Nature Preserve




There is no crumbly frozen cake to thaw.
Today, we are in the jungle. I mean mosquito. I mean
 
tigers and elephants sludging their way
to the lake for a drink and Don’t make sudden moves
 
or snakes startled from an afternoon nap
will greet you fang first. I think we are lost. Too hot
 
for any cold confection to survive. Even my tube
of sunblock is as warm as a baby’s bottle. You get
 
to those places I can’t reach, those places I dared
not even whisper before I walked down the aisle
 
in white. You never worried if our families
would clash, if they would clang like the clutch
 
of pale monkeys clanging the thin branches of the treetrops,
begging for our trail mix. You never worried
 
about my relatives staring at your pale, muscled calves—
things not usually seen outside of the bedroom. You wore
 
hiking shorts anyway. And still, they lavished ladle-fuls
of food on your plate. I think we are lost. My eyes are dark
 
and wet as that wild deer that walked right past us,
a little off the trail. I think we are lost, but for once
 
I don't mind. Eventually you turn us back to a place
not on any map, but I know I can trace it back with my finger
 
if we ever need it again. We made it one year
without a compass and we’re not about to start now.
~~~
For Marilyn who died in January



april 1 
found on our driveway
  like a feather dropped     by a crow
 

  8 of spades,        a playing    card /
 

       we played Crazy Eights, slapping        cards or holding them        as if they were birds that might fly        out of our hands 
decades ago, in our childhood
       like the translucent, whirling        image I imagine, prismatic and phosphorescent —         a murmuration of starlings swooping        and iridescent 
but it dissolved onto a gray wall, undecorated
       / glimpses of us wearing our        velvet Sunday best dresses, yours        usually crimson, mine blue
 

       we never had nice shoes. 
Now you have returned to water
 thanks to the Neptune Society spreading        your ashes over the Pacific
 
 
 april 2
 
Ceylon tea — that amber cup
            from Sri Lanka, popularly known here, before
            Americans became tea drinkers, as
                 Orange Pekoe;
                        our mother hated
                        so many things — 
                                              tea was
                                   rattlesnake venom to
                                                                     her
            I embraced it  ///
            What did you drink, Marilyn? I saw you only
with a Coke or a glass of wine in your hand?
Our mother whom you felt
damaged you / your life       spirals, the twisting iridescent birds
              fly at me now                       scintillating, spinning
                                     I blink
(Our mother drank many cups of coffee with cream a day.)
Our sad mother
                                   I blink
                                   and tell it to go back to our childhood
                                   of muddy little shoes from walking in
                                   the spider-filled orange groves.
There, the damaging must have Begun  / she
                                   loving me so much
                                                                      more
                                                                      than you.
I wish there had been more stories
like the one about the origin of her disliking tea
            at 17, she went to celebrate being made teacher
            of the one-room school she had attended and
            graduated from at her retiring teacher’s
            home, she was served for the first time — tea, she
            being from a German coffee-drinking family.
            Our mother hated it but politely choked it down.
            Would never again touch a drop of the
            poisonous beverage.
From that story, we learned that
our mother ritualized hating something — expected us
to admire her for it.
                        I took
                        that negative pattern
                        and spun it until I could have cloth enough
for an eloquent garment. Perhaps the lesson simply made you
feel yourself            helpless         ragged                      torn
I never
saw you that way, Marilyn,
though perhaps incomplete.
I pour a cup of Assam. Take a sip,
            let it wash through my mouth,
                        down my age-damaged throat,
think
of you sitting
with me in your Southern California 
backyard one May morning
next to the camellia bush.
I, as always with a cup of tea in my hand.
You, smoking.
I left all my family — you were part of it — 
left California and reinvented myself, even
mythologized myself as a tan “California Girl.”
You did not become an artist or a poet.
I suppose that’s why you felt damaged.
If only you knew how much imagination and sacrifice
it took for me to get away.
                        So many small things
                                   can save us
                                             from the damage
you talked of. For me, drinking that
first cup of Orange Pekoe
and making tea
my drink      risking rattlesnake poison
with every steaming cup,
a tiny emblem of a rebellion I still try to practice.
You left us so quickly, Marilyn,
and without any warning this January,
your house full of cancelled aspirations — glass
bowls, and cylinders, and huge globes
filled with sea scallop shells
            you combed the California seashores to 
                        find, collecting these empty shells, washed
free of their biological life.                                 Out of the ocean:
we two different daughters of a sailor.
 
april 3 
The spinning                      the scissors               the measuring
and thus our lives are given out
from the heavens, with unfair allotments
and varied, unaccountable fates,
born when we are, and to whom
you would have prevailed
in an age where women had to spin,
weave the material, cut it into britches and dresses,
undergarments and sheets, sew
and keep clean, warm, and comfortable a
household full or a castle full / men
children, hired hands, maidservants — you would have
done it
so well.
But you would have died young in such a world — 
diabetes, asthma, chronic bronchial infections
even in the 21st century where you lived to be
76       a world where all your skills were plied as
            substitute
for being an artist.
                      When I asked you a year ago,
not knowing that you would die this January,
what you would most like to have, if
money were not the object
             — since clearly all your measuring, cutting, and sewing
            had been for economical reasons,
            not art — 
you thought for a bit, raising your chin.
“A swimming pool in my backyard. One I could
step into every morning, swim, float — maybe in the afternoon
I’d go for a dip. Many evenings, I think,” she said
to me.                     Longing for some ocean? 
In our portrait,
if someone paints it, she will be 
sitting in a scallop shell,
her many jars of seashells behind her head. I
will be invisible, except for the spinning 
murmuration of birds that radiates
            past me. 
They read at her funeral, a poem from her journal
about lying on the beach,
the sand embracing her.
How much she loved it / felt safe,
felt released. Oh, Marilyn, all
those seashells emptied of their living
fleshy occupants. (the ugly parts that die and rot) now
glorious empty rooms
            in which to live an imaginary life,
                        to decorate,
to create beauty, 
            spaces to live
                        a different life.
What is left but your desires, locked in glass, and
an image of you walking
your beloved beaches, hands 
full of seashells, your
footprints measured, then quickly filled 
with the tidal flow.
 
april 4 
my spinning, 
            a whirlpool of faceted moving lights
                        Everything is Numbers!
down into a vortical glare that replaces
            my own mind’s desire 
                        Everything is Numbers! Everything is Numbers!
floating down
            like the crow’s
                        onyx feather
the 8
            of spades
                        random card
appearing
            last week
                        over gravel
8 legs on a spider,
            the arachnid so many people seem to
            fear, yet I lose track of time, stare into the wall
            or any space to replace real images with my imaginary
            ones, some random spider, who spins my fate
Crazy Eights, the child card game Marilyn and I played
pieces of eight, the dollar of
            pirate Spain — our childhood in Orange County
8, a vertical infinity sign
            everything is numbers / your
                        fire opal that Daddy brought
to you from India, and our mother
paid a jeweler to set it
into a ring. You wore the ring
more than sixty years. I suppose it was
on your finger at death
spinning,     spinning
to scintillate and iridesce
            We never had nice shoes.
 
april 5 
Easter Sunday. You and I always dyed
Easter eggs together, our mother busy at
her forty-hour-a-week bookkeeper’s job. I 
was intrigued with the colors,
but they never turned out so bright when
coloring the eggs. You, the artist,
were interested in the designs
to transfer onto the eggs,
cartoons, bunnies,
chicks.
We kept our eggs
separated from each other,
put them in separate bowls, neither
caring for the other’s creation. Still we
felt connected, even joyful, on those few holiday projects.
Not enough to make us friends.
My unwillingness to be like our classmates
embarrassed you. You chose invisibility
in school, rather than being known as “Diane’s
Sister.” 
That unwillingness to be like others 
was what made me a poet. So many little things, but that early decision
of yours, not to understand why I wanted to be weird,
is what made you make so 
many other small choices, preventing you 
from becoming an artist. “Look away,” our mother said to us,
when there were ugly things confronting us. 
I could not do that. You blame
our mother, yet it was you who decided to look away,
even though it meant not seeing the whole world,
even if meant you didn’t become an artist.
Poverty, of course, was the reason
we never had nice shoes.
 
april 6 
All numbers have
disappeared
                        instead
            there are mushrooms
            fungi that has always seemed
            more artful than tasty
            Sipping a cup of tea / soothes me
            as the mushrooms in a veloute sauce
            never could.
            I feel stymied / a rider
            with no horse. I want only to watch
            the stories unfold / the secret stories about why
            you chose to marry and have children / why
            I did not / the stories
                                    I try to banish
            blot out, replace with the diamond
            dog. A murmuration of iridescent starlings, 
            and the spider of eight, 
            twirling on its silk line, projecting infinity      art
            is made when you subject yourself
            to the unacceptable, then dredge
            yourself out,
                                    find a mineral replacement:
            infinity
            iridescer
            irised feather
            scintillater
                        a crystalline body whirls
            releasing me from
            the history, the stories it’s
            so hard to tell.
Until recent years, my sister
and I either ignored or disliked each other.
We fought continuously as children.
I have in my wrist a black bump that
protrudes near a vein.
                                    It’s the point of a pencil
that broke off and penetrated my wrist as we struggled
for the long yellow weapon.
A pencil, the weapon of a writer. But there was 
no bleeding, no seeming-wound to be dressed. 
We never told
our Mother, both too ashamed
of our brutality. I’ve never asked a doctor
about it, the pencil lead encapsulated
in my wrist. Nor ever spoken
of it to anyone.
I always wonder that so much must remain a secret?
Why
            we never had nice shoes.
 
april 7 
Young Marilyn, Old Marilyn.
there are places on this planet where
I find it hard to detect any beauty
therefore, silence
                        No nice shoes.
 
april 8 
there is silence
 
april 9 
Drinking
a blend of traditional
Darjeeling with a touch of Ceylon / this
tea takes me back to a Viennese visit, drinking
this very tea in the afternoon while my friend, Jonathan,
ate their famous Sacher torte.
The tea
seemed particularly aromatic — 
            “lightly scented with oil of bergamot
            and a hint of genuine Bourbon vanilla.”
Wishing for the moment in the past to reappear. I didn’t know
the tea from the Sacher Hotel
was as famous as the cake
                                until I found in my Upton Tea catalogue
                                a listing for “Scented Darjeeling”
                                under the heading “Earl Grey Blends”
This tea,
any cup of tea!
Hard to believe. no! Sad to
think my Mother almost spat out her first taste
of tea.
What worldly thing must I touch to
bring Marilyn back into my
sedate life, my sister Marilyn who died in January? 
Her hand — I’d like to imagine timidly touching her
      hand — Marilyn’s hand.
            Her right hand on which she wore the fire opal ring.
                        In that hand she’d be holding a cigarette.
Smoke and fire makes me think of her — 
            not water, though it was that Pacific ocean 
                        filled with seashells
                                    that she was in touch with. My old hands,
not really like hers at all. She had big hands for shaping things,
            while mine are small,      like birds.
~~~
It seems I have always sat here watching men like you — 
who turn heads, whose gaze is always either a kiss
or a slap or the whiplash of pure disregard. Why fret? All
you’re doing is walking. You’re this year’s It, the
one righteous integer of cool cruising down a great-lipped
channel of hushed adoration, women turned girls
again, brightening in spite of themselves. That
brave, wilting smile — you don’t see it, do you?
How she tells herself to move on; blinks until she can.
~~~
First there was Jim, clamping to my long black hair             that nine-pound Cleopatra wig              with nylon bands and bobbie pins.Meanwhile I was on fire for Chad, who coached me             a bit impatiently Tuesday nights             on my Joan-of-Arc inflection.Then Terence said I’d be perfect for the lounge-singer-             turned-whore, and as it turned out             that was a fairly easy gig.Max signed me on soon after, claiming I was a natural             for Eternally Aggrieved Girl,             which in hindsight hurts me deeply.So by the time you followed me back to the green room             to wait in the hallway—whistling!—             for my scrubbed face to emerge,naturally I was wary, waiting for the script              you never bothered to come up with.             It was damned awkward sitting there,nothing but milkshakes between us. Maybe, I thought,              you’d assumed I was the one with a script.               Finally I decided to give Terence a call.I didn’t like the way you looked at me so steadily             with your chin resting on one fist,             as if the table were a table, the boardsA floor. Listening there as if you meant it,              as if something I could say were true, and every             moment from now on would be my cue.
~~~
I might have married a painter,
Therefore his mother. A radar
Detector, a snow-covered
Mountain, a novel
By John Grisham not even
Out yet. No, I wed
The cop directing my rush,Toot toot, a trainer to test
Agility, a kettle calling
Time to steep. Yes,
But I married this bird you must
Close your eyes to know
At scale, to hear his trills
And fancy arpeggios
Come-come-hithering.
His note of warning.
~~~
I’m not yet comfortable with the word,
its short clean woosh that sounds like
life. At dinner last night my single girls
said in admonition, “It’s not wife-approved”
about a friend’s upcoming trip. Their
eyes rolled up and over and out their
pretty young heads. Wife, why does it
sound like a job? “I need a wife” the famous
feminist wrote, “a wife that will keep my
clothes clean, ironed, mended, replaced
if need be.” A word that could be made
easily into maid. A wife that does, fixes
soothes, honors, obeys, Housewife,
fishwife, bad wife, good wife, what’s
the word for someone who stares long
into the morning, unable to even fix tea
some days, the kettle steaming over
loud like a train whistle, she who cries
in the mornings, she who tears a hole
in the earth and cannot stop grieving,
the one who wants to love you, but often
isn’t good at even that, the one who
doesn’t want to be diminished
by how much she wants to be yours.
~~~
You have changed me already. I am a fireball
That is hurtling towards the sky to where you are
You can choose not to look up but I am a giant orange ball
That is throwing sparks upon your face
Oh look at them shake
Upon you like a great planet that has been murdered by change
O too this is so dramatic this shaking
Of my great planet that is bigger than you thought it would be
So you ran and hid
Under a large tree. She was graceful, I think
That tree although soon she will wither
Into ten black snakes upon your throat
And when she does I will be wandering as I always am
A graceful lady that is part museum
Of the voices of the universe everyone else forgets
I will hold your voice in a little box
And when you come upon me I won’t look back at you
You will feel a hand upon your heart while I place your voice back
Into the heart from where it came from
And I will not cry also
Although you will expect me to
I was wiser too than you had expected
For I knew all along you were mine
 
 
~~~
Today is a Tuesday, one of many.
He has a girl he loves every Tuesday,
her day off. He burns
at the fine fire of her conscience,
tells her they’ll be married
someday. He has a wife,
Doreen, a freckle-faced fat thing
who harbors resentment that during her Tuesday
at her mother’s, he insists on going to the movies.
Rose petals he picks up in the neighbor’s yard
end up at Tuesday’s feet and
sprinkled through the sheets.
Of course they must make love,
since he sees her only once a week.
Doreen requires sex after seeing her mother.
He feels like an ox on Tuesday, powerful and massive.
He tells this to Tuesday
and to Doreen.
Doreen tells him he is an ox
a brute master of the air and his rightful bed.
But Tuesday, who knows oxen
are slow moving, dim witted,
and castrated at birth,
follows him home instead of playing her dulcimer,
climbs the wall, watches him mounting his wife,
leaves rose petals on his doorstep,
takes the train to cornfields, steers and heifers
watches the city disappear in rain.
Thinks briefly of how tenderly
he rose in her fingers
while the remains of their breakfast,
eggs and potatoes
cooled on the wooden table
with the tattered tablecloth.
~~~
Remember me when I am gone away,          Gone far away into the silent land;          When you can no more hold me by the hand, Nor I half turn to go yet turning stay. Remember me when no more day by day          You tell me of our future that you plann'd:          Only remember me; you understand It will be late to counsel then or pray. Yet if you should forget me for a while          And afterwards remember, do not grieve:          For if the darkness and corruption leave          A vestige of the thoughts that once I had, Better by far you should forget and smile          Than that you should remember and be sad.
~~~
My Daddy’s forehead is so big, we don’t need a dining roomtable. My Daddy’s forehead so big, his hat size is equator. Sobig, it’s a five-head. Tyra Banks burst into tears when she seenmy Daddy’s forehead. My Daddy’s forehead got its own area code.My Daddy baseball cap got stretch marks. My Daddy pillowcasegot craters. His eyebrows need GPS to find each other. My Daddyforehead lives in two time zones. Planets confuse my Daddy foreheadfor the sun. Couch cushions lose quarters in the wrinkles in my Daddyforehead. My Daddy so smart, he fall asleep with the movie on andwake up soon as the credits start to roll. My Daddy so smart, heperform surgery on his own ingrown toenail. Momma was notimpressed, but my Daddy got brains. My Daddy know exactlyhow to drive me to my friend’s house without lookin at no map.My Daddy born here, he so smart, he know the highways likethe wrinkles in his forehead. He know the free clinics like the grayhairs on his big ass head. My Daddy so smart, he wear a stethoscopeand a white coat. My Daddy drive to work in a minivan only slightlybigger than his forehead, that’s just how my Daddy rolls. My Daddygot swag. My Daddy dance to “Single Ladies” in the hallway.My Daddy drink a small coffee cream and sugar. My Daddydrink a whole can of Red Bull. My Daddy eat a whole packof sour Skittles and never had a cavity. My Daddy so smart,he got a pullout couch in his office. Got a mini fridge there too.Got a cell phone, and a pager, and a email address where I can leavehim messages when he’s not at home. My Daddy’s not home.Momma saves a plate that turns cold.But when my Daddy does come home, he got a officein his bedroom too. Computer screen night light,Momma says she can’t sleep right, but my Daddygot work, my Daddy at work, at home, in the attic,with the TV on, in the dark, from the front yard,through the windows, you can see him working, glassflickering, my house got its own forehead, glinting, sweaty,in the evening, while my Daddy at work, at home,in his own area code,a whole other time zone.
~~~
When this day returns to meI will value your heart, long hurt in long division,over mine. Mouth above mine too —say you love me, truth never moremeant, say you are angry.Words, words we net with our mouths.Soul is an old thirst but not as firstas the body’s perhaps,though on bad nights its melancholyeats us out, to a person.True, time is undigressing.Yet true is all we can be:rhyming you, rhyming me.
~~~
The rain whistled.
 
A taxi brought me to your apartment building
And there I stood.
 
I had dreamed a dream
Of us in a bedroom.
The light shining upon us in white sheets.
 
You were singing me a song of your sailing days
And in the dream
I reached deep in you and pulled out a cardinal
Which in bright red
Flew out the window.
 
Sometimes when we talk
On the phone, I think to myself
That the deep perfect of your soul
Is what draws me to you.
But still what soul is perfect?
All souls are misshapen and off-colored.
Morning comes within a soul
And makes it obey another law
In which all souls are snowflakes.
 
Once at a funeral, a man had died
And with the prayers said, his soul flew up in a hurry
Like it had been let out of something awful.
It was strangely colored, that soul.
And it was a funny shape and a funny temperature.
As it blew away, all of us looking felt the cold.
~~~
We rise from the snow where we’ve
lain on our backs and flown like children,
from the imprint of perfect wings and cold gowns,   
and we stagger together wine-breathed into town   
where our people are building
their armies again, short years after
body bags, after burnings. There is a man
I’ve come to love after thirty, and we have   
our rituals of coffee, of airports, regret.   
After love we smoke and sleep
with magazines, two shot glasses
and the black and white collapse of hours.   
In what time do we live that it is too late   
to have children? In what place
that we consider the various ways to leave?   
There is no list long enough
for a selective service card shriveling   
under a match, the prison that comes of it,   
a flag in the wind eaten from its pole   
and boys sent back in trash bags.
We’ll tell you. You were at that time   
learning fractions. We’ll tell you
about fractions. Half of us are dead or quiet   
or lost. Let them speak for themselves.
We lie down in the fields and leave behind   
the corpses of angels.
~~~
As we sat at the feet of the string quartet,  in their living room, on a winter night,  through the hardwood floor spurts and gulps  and tips and shudders came up, and the candle-scent  air was thick-alive with pearwood,  ebony, spruce, poplar, and horse  howled, and cat skreeled, and then,  when the Grösse Fugue was around us, under us,  over us, in us, I felt I was hearing  the genes of my birth-family, pulled, keening  and grieving and scathing, along each other,  scraping and craving, I felt myself held in that  woods of hating longing, and I knew  and knew myself, and my parents, and their parents,  there—and then, at a distance, I sensed,  as if it were thirty years ago,  a being, far off yet, oblique-approaching,  straying toward, and then not toward,  and then toward this place, like a wandering dreaming  herdsman, my husband. And I almost wanted  to warn him away, to call out to him  to go back whence he came, into some calmer life,  but his beauty was too moving to me,  and I wanted too much to not be alone, in the  covert, any more, and so I prayed him  come to me, I bid him hasten, and good welcome.
~~~
Think Beyoncé’s “Lemonade”



Belle as beast
Eel as style
Bats testy
Best lastly
Bluely astute — 
as bull
as beetle
as Bey
as butte
Beauty as lute
   thus beauty as lush
Late lethal
Lust salty
She’ll eye
She’ll tally
Yes stately yet stealth
Yes steely yet sly
Hey lathe — 
   [she taut]
Hey sleuth — 
   [she tale]
He heel
He that
She bluesy
She ballsy
She byte
She shall
~~~
We meet midway to walk white cobbles under a fish-flesh gray sky. Europe is collapsing; we are collapsingalways and again no matter how hardwe love one another. I don’t understand our failure, where the feed loops back and spits us into another country, another junior suite reenacting this same,same beat of   a scene that begins, rises,never ends, always ends —Our intentions don’t meet, their courses set differently by a force you don’t believe in,could be as simple as life. I want to be the wife you don’t want. You won’t let go of my wrist. I resist, threaten, bully, acquiesce. We write the next act of The Alchemistin New York, Lisbon, a beach, a bar, star-crossed maybe from different galaxies. You approach, I retreat. You retreat, I reproach.The manic two-step jitters over North Africa’s dunes farther than our hero, Santiago, can see. I rise in the night to find the sharp knifethat came with the pears as a courtesy.
~~~
All master narratives of the mind in a rowboat and the rowboat as beautiful as the swamp
  glowing the dungeon-state lily pads, unfolding like riddles of water, the Plasticine
     heads of amphibians, speckled skin of religious fervor, and the razor-blade weeds.
All master narratives of the body in a rowboat at the bottom of the swamp that has no hands.
All master narratives of the spirit in the rowboat sky reflecting the infant swamp, clouds of filth, soil knotted like tupelos and toppled alphabets.
All master narratives of the skin in a rowboat inside a pine coffin of swamp water.
     All master narratives of thinking like a woman who says,  “I choose inappropriate relationships.”
All master narratives of dramatic structure in the soggy swamp, against the humid flags beating the wind.
All master narratives of mythology like my son saying, “and then he turned into a very big wolf.”
“I think he was very sad.”
“He has feelings too, you know.”
“I think he was sad because he got trapped inside the doors.”
“Oh my god, there are different Fenrirs.”
“Loki’s Fenrir met a different Fenrir.”
“Are wolves part of the cat family?”
“Hey, look up on your phone if they can change forms because these guys look different from the real Fenrir.”
“See that white picture where he’s up on top? He turns huge and tries to eat the sun.”
              “Oh, that’s a tough Fenrir.”
                      “I think he obeys the serpent.”
              “Now that’s sad Fenrir.”
                           “Or maybe Loki turns into the serpent.”
              “Oh, Loki, are you a master of evil?”
“I think they can change forms.”
~~~
I
 
Spawn of fantasies
Sifting the appraisable
Pig Cupid his rosy snout
Rooting erotic garbage
"Once upon a time"
Pulls a weed white star-topped
Among wild oats sown in mucous membrane
I would an eye in a Bengal light
Eternity in a sky-rocket
Constellations in an ocean
Whose rivers run no fresher
Than a trickle of saliva
 
These are suspect places
 
I must live in my lantern
Trimming subliminal flicker
Virginal to the bellows
Of experience
Colored glass.
 
 
 
II
 
At your mercy
Our Universe
Is only
A colorless onion
You derobe
Sheath by sheath
Remaining
A disheartening odour
About your nervy hands
 
 
 
III
 
Night
Heavy with shut-flower's nightmares
---------------------------------------------
Noon
Curled to the solitaire
Core of the
Sun
 
 
 
IV
 
Evolution fall foul of
Sexual equality
Prettily miscalculate
Similitude
 
Unnatural selection
Breed such sons and daughters
As shall jibber at each other
Uninterpretable cryptonyms
Under the moon
 
Give them some way of braying brassily
For caressive calling
Or to homophonous hiccoughs
Transpose the laugh
Let them suppose that tears
Are snowdrops or molasses
Or anything
Than human insufficiences
Begging dorsal vertebrae
 
Let meeting be the turning
To the antipodean
And Form a blur
Anything
Than to seduce them
To the one
As simple satisfaction
For the other
 
 
 
V
 
Shuttle-cock and battle-door
A little pink-love
And feathers are strewn
 
 
 
VI
 
Let Joy go solace-winged
To flutter whom she may concern
 
 
 
VII
 
Once in a mezzanino
The starry ceiling
Vaulted an unimaginable family
Bird-like abortions
With human throats
And Wisdom's eyes
Who wore lamp-shade red dresses
And woolen hair
 
One bore a baby
In a padded porte-enfant
Tied with a sarsenet ribbon
To her goose's wings
 
But for the abominable shadows
I would have lived
Among their fearful furniture
To teach them to tell me their secrets
Before I guessed
-- Sweeping the brood clean out
 
 
 
VIII
 
Midnight empties the street
--- --- --- To the left a boy
--- One wing has been washed in rain
The other will never be clean any more ---
Pulling door-bells to remind
Those that are snug
To the right a haloed ascetic
Threading houses
Probes wounds for souls
--- The poor can't wash in hot water ---
And I don't know which turning to take ---
 
 
 
IX
 
We might have coupled
In the bed-ridden monopoly of a moment
Or broken flesh with one another
At the profane communion table
Where wine is spill't on promiscuous lips
 
We might have given birth to a butterfly
With the daily-news
Printed in blood on its wings
 
 
 
X
 
In some
Prenatal plagiarism
Foetal buffoons
Caught tricks
--- --- --- --- ---
From archetypal pantomime
Stringing emotions
Looped aloft
--- --- --- ---
For the blind eyes
That Nature knows us with
And most of Nature is green
--- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- ---
 
 
 
XI
 
Green things grow
Salads
For the cerebral
Forager's revival
And flowered flummery
Upon bossed bellies
Of mountains
Rolling in the sun
 
 
 
XII
 
Shedding our petty pruderies
From slit eyes
 
We sidle up
To Nature
--- --- --- that irate pornographist
 
 
 
XIII
 
The wind stuffs the scum of the white street
Into my lungs and my nostrils
Exhilarated birds
Prolonging flight into the night
Never reaching --- --- --- --- ------ --- ---
~~~
He described her mouth as full of ashes.
So when he kissed her finally
he was thinking about ashes
and the blacker rim just below
the edge of the ashtray,
and the faint dark rim that outlined her lips,
and the lips themselves, at the limit
of another darkness, farther
and far more interior.
Then the way the red,
paling, just outside those lines
caught fire and the pages caught
soon after that. Slowly at first,
but then all at once
at the scalloped brown corners of each;
like the ruff of an offended and darkening bird,
extended, then folded
in on itself; multiple,
stiffening, gone.
~~~
No one loves you more ... more ... more ...    There were sincere lies everywhere placed directly beforethe next step. Does everyone pretend, part of aliveI am proposing words — All structures have crumbled in earliest death. I’m crossing the yellow sandsIt’s so hard to know without relating it, to youshaping a heart, take hold of me and someone saysI don’t get it! You don’t have to have love,or you do, which? I don’t think you do; beforethe explosion? I was here without it and have been inmany places loveless. I don’t want youto know what I’m really thinking or do I, beforecreation when there might be no “I knew”Everything one’s ever said not quite true. He or she be-trays you; why you want to hurt me ... badWant to, or just do? Treason was provokedeverywhere even here, by knowing one was one andI was alone, a pale hue. The sky of deathis milky green today, like a poison pool near adesert mine. Picked prickly pear fruit and Itasted it, then we drove on, maybe to Yarnell.These outposts where I grew up; I didn’t do thatI have no ... identity, and the love is an objectto kick as you walk on the blazing bare ground, where ...    sentimental, when what I love, I ... don’t have that oneword. This fire all there is ... to find ... I find itYou have to find it. It isn’t love, it’s what?
~~~
We sat across the table.
he said, cut off your hands.
they are always poking at things.
they might touch me.
I said yes.
Food grew cold on the table.
he said, burn your body.
it is not clean and smells like sex.
it rubs my mind sore.
I said yes.
I love you, I said.
That’s very nice, he said
I like to be loved,
that makes me happy.
Have you cut off your hands yet?
~~~
At length, by so much importunity press'd,Take, C——, at once, the inside of my breast;This stupid indiff'rence so often you blame,Is not owing to nature, to fear, or to shame:I am not as cold as a virgin in lead,Nor is Sunday's sermon so strong in my head:I know but too well how time flies along,That we live but few years, and yet fewer are young.But I hate to be cheated, and never will buyLong years of repentance for moments of joy,Oh! was there a man (but where shall I findGood sense and good nature so equally join'd?)Would value his pleasure, contribute to mine;Not meanly would boast, nor would lewdly design;Not over severe, yet not stupidly vain,For I would have the power, tho' not give the pain.No pedant, yet learned; no rake-helly gay,Or laughing, because he has nothing to say;To all my whole sex obliging and free,Yet never be fond of any but me;In public preserve the decorum that's just,And shew in his eyes he is true to his trust;Then rarely approach, and respectfully bow,But not fulsomely pert, nor yet foppishly low.But when the long hours of public are past,And we meet with champagne and a chicken at last,May ev'ry fond pleasure that moment endear;Be banish'd afar both discretion and fear!Forgetting or scorning the airs of the crowd,He may cease to be formal, and I to be proud.Till lost in the joy, we confess that we live,And he may be rude, and yet I may forgive.And that my delight may be solidly fix'd,Let the friend and the lover be handsomely mix'd;In whose tender bosom my soul may confide,Whose kindness can soothe me, whose counsel can guide.From such a dear lover as here I describe,No danger should fright me, no millions should bribe;But till this astonishing creature I know,As I long have liv'd chaste, I will keep myself so.I never will share with the wanton coquette,Or be caught by a vain affectation of wit.The toasters and songsters may try all their art,But never shall enter the pass of my heart.I loath the lewd rake, the dress'd fopling despise:Before such pursuers the nice virgin flies:And as Ovid has sweetly in parable told,We harden like trees, and like rivers grow cold.
~~~
If the nose of the pig in the market of Firenze has lost its matte patina, and shines, brassy,  even in the half light; if the mosaic saint on the tiles of the Basilica floor is half gone,  worn by the gravity of solid soles, the passing of piety; if the arms of Venus have reentered the rubble, taken by time, her perennial lover, mutilating even the memory of beauty;                                                                                                            and if the mother, hiding with her child from the death squads of brutality, if she, trying to keep the child quiet, to keep them from being found out,  holds her hand over his mouth, holds him  against her, tighter and tighter, until he stops breathing;                                if the restorer—trying to bring back to perfection the masterpiece scarred by its transit through time, wipes away by mistake, the mysterious smile. . .                                                                                                           if what  loves, and love is, takes away what it aims to preserve,                                   then here is the place to fall  silent, meaning well but in danger of marring what we would praise, unable to do more than wear down the marble  steps to the altar, smother the fire  we would keep from the wind’s extinction,                                                                                                           or if, afraid  of our fear, we lift the lid from the embers, and send  abroad, into the parched night, a flight of sparks, incendiary, dying to catch somewhere,  hungry for fuel, the past, its dry provision tinder for brilliance and heat, prelude to cold, and to ash. . .
~~~
I, being born a woman and distressed
By all the needs and notions of my kind,
Am urged by your propinquity to find
Your person fair, and feel a certain zest
To bear your body’s weight upon my breast:
So subtly is the fume of life designed,
To clarify the pulse and cloud the mind,
And leave me once again undone, possessed.
Think not for this, however, the poor treason
Of my stout blood against my staggering brain,
I shall remember you with love, or season
My scorn with pity,—let me make it plain:
I find this frenzy insufficient reason
For conversation when we meet again.
~~~
If I leave all for thee, wilt thou exchange And be all to me? Shall I never miss Home-talk and blessing and the common kiss That comes to each in turn, nor count it strange, When I look up, to drop on a new range Of walls and floors ... another home than this? Nay, wilt thou fill that place by me which is Filled by dead eyes too tender to know change? That's hardest. If to conquer love, has tried, To conquer grief, tries more ... as all things prove; For grief indeed is love and grief beside. Alas, I have grieved so I am hard to love. Yet love me—wilt thou? Open thine heart wide, And fold within, the wet wings of thy dove.
~~~
for Brandon Goacher



I.
 
Let me speak with expressive
 
hesitation & a feeling for
 
interment why even
 
lineate what isn’t broken by
 
music let me speak with
 
inextricable reluctance.
 
I want to tear the heart
 
from refused convalescence
 
& feed it those long fronds
 
of river bed grass. I want to
 
tear the heart out of style
 
& put it between
 
utter thrall & the infancy
 
of all things impure.
 
Torn out, a flame thickens
 
between us as if
 
not right now we’ll be
 
ripped from this life
 
or each other a white
 
lie not a little more tender
 
than quick. Inextricable
 
reluctance to die or even
 
leave youth culture ever.
 
What a stupid feeling.
 
Do you think it isn’t
 
true? The very existence
 
of flame throwers proves
 
that sometime, somewhere,
 
someone said to themselves
 
‘You know I want to
 
set those people over there
 
on fire but I’m just not
 
close enough to get the
 
job done.’ Someone
 
puts their arms around you
 
in the cold. There’s an al-
 
most disquieting closeness
 
as gossamer clots &
 
becomes an impasto derivative
 
of some newly visible
 
interdependence. Flame
 
throwers then are just
 
a description of prevailing
 
ideology, relics, the life
 
of the party, a soul
 
flirts by burning
 
that name for itself
 
up in jonesing that comes
 
at the end of desire?
 
Well I wouldn’t know
 
about that. A little
 
goat. Why would it
 
nuzzle dreamily up
 
the way I nuzzle dreamily
 
up to my knees. In the
 
‘fatal position’ as my
 
nephew used to call it
 
estranged from play
 
waiting on the fox hunt.
 
Oh baby
 
it beats up my lips
 
the somatic effects
 
of contriving a psychic
 
blockade against death
 
with the contours of your
 
face & healing
 
in constant eclipse
 
where all things
 
inextricably broken by
 
music make the basic
 
rhythmic unit go
 
something like this — I
 
don’t want to loose you. I
 
don’t want to be
 
empty, clever hold &
 
keep you. I was lost
 to you to start with still
 I keep on coming back.
 
Do you think you’ll
 
keep on coming back to me
 
forever? That’s the meaning
 of our life together
 baby.
~~~
Just as he changes himself, in the end eternity changes him.
—Mallarmé



On the phonograph, the voice
of a woman already dead for three
decades, singing of a man
who could make her do anything.   
On the table, two fragile   
glasses of black wine,
a bottle wrapped in its towel.   
It is that room, the one
we took in every city, it is
as I remember: the bed, a block   
of moonlight and pillows.   
My fingernails, pecks of light   
on your thighs.
The stink of the fire escape.   
The wet butts of cigarettes   
you crushed one after another.   
How I watched the morning come   
as you slept, more my son   
than a man ten years older.   
How my breasts feel, years   
later, the tongues swishing   
in my dress, some yours, some   
left by other men.
Since then, I have always   
wakened first, I have learned   
to leave a bed without being   
seen and have stood
at the washbasins, wiping oil   
and salt from my skin,
staring at the cupped water   
in my two hands.
I have kept everything
you whispered to me then.
I can remember it now as I see you   
again, how much tenderness we could   
wedge between a stairwell   
and a police lock, or as it was,   
as it still is, in the voice
of a woman singing of a man
who could make her do anything.
~~~
or, The Wary Physician



A doctor, of great skill and fame, Paulo Purganti was his name, Had a good, comely, virtuous wife; No woman led a better life: She to intrigue was ev'n hard hearted: She chuckled when a bawd was carted; And thought the nation ne'er would thrive, Till all the whores were burnt alive.     On married men, that dared be bad, She thought no mercy should be had; They should be hanged, or starved, or flayed, Or served like Romish priests in Swede. In short, all lewdness she defied; And stiff was her parochial pride.     Yet, in an honest way, the dame Was a great lover of that same; And could from Scripture take her cue, That husbands should give wives their due.     Her prudence did so justly steer Between the gay and the severe,That, if in some regards, she choseTo curb poor Paulo in too close;In others, she relaxed again,And governed with a looser rein.    Thus, though she strictly did confineThe doctor from excess of wine;With oysters, eggs, and vermicelli,She let him almost burst his belly:Thus, drying coffee was denied;But chocolate that want supplied;And for tobacco—who could bear it?Filthy concomitant of claret!—(Blest resolution!) one might seeEringo roots, and Bohea tea.She often stroked the doctor's band,And stroked his beard, and kissed his hand,Kindly complained, that after noonHe went to pore on books too soon:She held it wholesomer by much,To rest a little on the couch;About his waist in bed-a-nightsShe clung on close—for fear of sprites.    The doctor understood the call,But had not always wherewithal.    The Lion's skin too short, you know,(As Plutarch's Morals finely show)Was lengthened by the Fox's tail;And Art supplies, where Strength may fail.    Unwilling then in arms to meetThe enemy he could not beat,He strove to lengthen the campaign,And save his forces by chicane.Fabius, the Roman chief, who thusBy fair retreat grew Maximus,Shows us, that all warrior can do,With force superior is cunctando.    One day, then, as the foe drew near,With Love, and Joy, and Life, and Dear,Our Don, who knew this tittle-tattleDid, sure as trumpet, call to battle,Thought it extremely à propos,To ward against the coming blow:To ward: But how? ay, there's the question:Fierce the assault, unarmed the bastion.    The doctor feigned a strange surprise;He felt her pulse; he viewed her eyes;That was too fast; these rolled too quick:She was, he said, or would be sick:He judged it absolutely good,That she should purge, and cleanse her blood.Spa-waters to that end were got:If they passed easily or not,What matters it? the lady's feverContinued as violent as ever.    For a distemper of this kind(Blackmore and Hans are of my mind)If once it youthful blood infects,And chiefly of the female sex,Is scarce removed by pill or potion;Whate'er may be our doctor's notion.    One luckless night then, as in bedThe doctor and the dame were laid,Again this cruel fever came:High pulse, short breath, and blood in flame.What measures shall poor Paulo keep    With Madam in this piteous taking?She, like Macbeth, has murdered sleep,    And won't allow him rest, though waking.Sad state of matters! when we dareNor ask for peace, nor offer war:Nor Livy nor Comines have shown,What in this juncture may be done.Grotius might own, that Paulo's case isHarder, than any which he placesAmongst his Belli, and his Pacis.He strove, alas, but strove in vain,By dint of logic to maintainThat all the sex was born to grieve,Down to her Ladyship from Eve.He ranged his tropes, and preached up patience;Backed his opinion with quotations,Divines and moralists; and run onQuite through from Seneca to Bunyan.As much in vain he bid her tryTo fold her arms, to close her eye;Telling her, rest would do her good,If any thing in Nature could:So held the Greeks quite down from Galen,Masters and princes of the calling:So all our modern friends maintain,(Though no great Greeks) in Warwick-lane.    Reduce, my Muse, the wand'ring song:A tale should never be too long.    The more he talked, the more she burned,And sighed, and tossed, and groaned, and turned:At last, I wish, said she, my dear—(And whispered something in his ear).You wish! wish on, the doctor cries:Lord! when will womankind be wise?What! in your waters; are you mad?Why, poison is not half so bad.I'll do—but I give you warning;You'll die before tomorrow morning.—'Tis kind, my dear, what you advise,The lady with a sign replies:But life, you know, at best is pain:And death is what we should disdain.So do it therefore, and adieu:For I will die for love of you.—Let wanton wives by death be scared:But, to my comfort, I'm prepared.
~~~
spilling water from my back,
you call and i come.
that exhausted walk to reach you
breathless and no i didn’t run
to see you, i’ve been smoking
too much, same thing.
 
another awkward hug in the car
as my face smashes your cheek
that i can feel it leaving now
is the saddest, a beautiful eruption
you could have picked it off the tree
and chowed
 
but you weren’t hungry.
feeling it dying away all day
much worse than the straining
against the leash, another gorgeous
thing that should not have happened,
gone again.
 
~~~
I’m through! I’m through!she says and resays.The years pass.Her feathers gray.Her eggs lay themselvesless frequently. The sky falls.
~~~
When Americans say a man
takes liberties, they mean
he’s gone too far. In Philadelphia today I saw
a kid on a leash look mom-ward
and announce his fondest wish: one
bicentennial burger, hold
the relish. Hold is forget,
in American.
On the courts of Philadelphia
the rich prepare
to serve, to fault. The language is a game as well,
in which love can mean nothing,
doubletalk mean lie. I’m saying
doubletalk with me. I’m saying
go so far the customs are untold.
Make nothing without words,
and let me be
the one you never hold.
~~~
When black, men drown. They spend their whole lifetimes
justifying the gall of springing the trap, the inconvenience
of slouched denim, of coupling beyond romance or aim.
All the while, the rising murk edges toward their chins.
Hurriedly, someone crafts another scientific tome, a giddy
exploration of the curious dysfunction identifying black
men first as possible, then as necessary. Elegant equations
succumb to a river that blurs quotient and theory, rendering
them unreadable, and the overwhelm easily disappears
the men, their wiry heads glistening, then gulped. All that’s
left is the fathers’ last wisdom, soaked wreckage on silver:Girl, that water ain’t nothing but wet. I’m gon’ be alright.
 
When black men drown, their daughters turn to their mothers
and ask What should I do with this misnamed shiver in myleft shoulder? How should I dress in public? They are weary
of standing at the shore, hands shading their eyes, trying
to make out their own fathers among the thousands bobbing
in the current. The mothers mumble and point to any flailing
that seems familiar. Mostly, they’re wrong. Buoyed by church
moans and comfort food of meat and cream, the daughters
try on other names that sound oddly broken when pressed
against the dank syllables of the fathers’. Drained, with justforward in mind, they walk using the hip of only one parent.
They scratch in their sleep. Black water wells up in the wound.
 
When black men drown, their daughters are fascinated with
the politics of water, how gorgeously a surface breaks
to receive, how it weeps so sanely shut. And the thrashing
of hands, shrieking of names: I was Otis, I was Willie Earl,they called me Catfish. Obsessed by the waltzing of tides,
the daughters remember their fathers—the scorch of beard
electrifying the once-in-a-while kiss, the welts in thick arms,
eyes wearied with so many of the same days wedged behind
them. When black men drown, their daughters memorize all
the steps involved in the deluge. They know how long it takes
for a weakened man to dissolve. A muted light, in the shape
of a little girl, used to be enough to light a daddy’s way home.
 
When black men drown, their daughters drag the water’s floor
with rotting nets, pull in whatever still breathes. They insist their
still-dripping daddies sit down for cups of insanely sweetened
tea, sniffs of rotgut, tangled dinners based on improbable swine.
The girls hope to reacquaint their drowned fathers with the concept
of body, but outlines slosh in drift and retreat. The men can’t get
dry. Parched, they scrub flooded hollows and weep for water
to give them name and measure as mere blood once did. Knocking
over those spindly-legged dinette chairs, they interrupt the failed
feast and mutter Baby girl, gotta go, baby gotta go, their eyes
misted with their own murders. Grabbing their girls, they spit
out love in reverse and stumble toward the banks of some river.
 
When black men drown their daughters, the rash act is the only
plausible response to the brain’s tenacious mouth and its dare: Yes, yes, open your ashed hands and release that wingless child. Note
the arc of the sun-drenched nosedive, the first syllable of the child’s
name unwilling from the man’s mouth, the melody of billow that
begins as blessed clutch. Someone crouching inside the father waits
impatiently for the shutting, the lethargic envelop, and wonders if
the daughter’s wide and realizing eye will ever close to loose him.
It never will, and the man and his child and the daughter and her
father gaze calmly into the wrecked science of each other’s lives.
The sun struggles to spit a perfect gold upon the quieting splash.
The river pulses stylish circles of its filth around the swallow.
 
 
~~~
I really fucked up. My E-flat key was loose. I only got a few hours of sleep the night before because Robyn and I were on the phone. They gave me the wrong repertoire list. How was I to know that high altitude affects clarinet reeds? I ran out of beta blockers. I forgot to bring a water bottle. I was worried that they’d hire that asshole who they don’t like because he threatened to blackball them at the union meeting. The acoustics were terrible. The second violinist used a new rosin and that threw her off, which unnerved me. My tinnitus roared the whole time. Robyn auditioned right before me. Just as I blew the first note, it dawned on me that Robyn might be sleeping with the conductor. Someone backstage slammed a door and I had to start all over again. The concertmaster doesn’t know a trumpet from a trombone, but since he’s powerful in a certain tiny corner of the music world everyone feels forced to curry favor with him. I forgot to eat. The audition committee talked the whole time. A clang in the heating system was near deafening. My carpal tunnel flared up. My neck twinges flared up. My arthritis flared up. I only got a few hours of sleep. I would have won the last competition, except that the concertmaster’s student was appointed with no audition, so I kept wondering if the same thing would happen again. I forgot I wasn’t playing the flute. I only got a few hours of sleep because Robyn and I were on the phone all night and decided to end our marriage. I really fucked up.
~~~
Whenever folks discuss finding themselves,
ya get kinda giggly. Maybe b/c ya found
yrself considering yr Armenian love
who preferred ya in both corset and bindi,
and it was for her ya begrudgingly waxed
yr jungle-scabbard    ...    Ya find yrself in the fret
of reclamation via musks all motherland-misty
(coconut milk, marine accord, mimosa tree). Last
weekend, ya found yrself in leggings to argue
again with yr Dominican love over the tender
texture of Texas tamales. Ya not-so-secretly want
to find yrself in a garden kissing a risk-
taking party until ya feel as good as a half-price
smoothie. Somehow, identity never finds ya
kohl-eyed in magenta blooms photographed
by a mixed-race admirer on a humid evening,
mostly b/c yr too busy galaxy-gazing
to be anyone’s so-fair-and-lovely. Was that
a touch of pride or self-pity? Probably. But ya
just can’t deal with another stranger’s surprise
at yr love of both tequila and mango lassis.
Does yr Guyanese love truly expect ya to replace
the chicken & fish in yr diet with mushrooms
that arbitrarily? You’re so black, yr told pretty
frequently. Ya don’t know what to make of it:
humanity. Ever find yrself advised by
Bangladeshi Brooklynites? Like they know
yr bae Poetry! Loves, let’s stop projecting
insecurities. But maybe it’s like when ya tried
to be cheerful after a famous poet called ya Debbie
Downer for mentioning the hurricanes in yr other
sovereignty? Never don’t find yrself coring
what music can be cleaved from a dull language
into an anomalous nationality. A personal theory:
we all behave oddly around fat titties. Now here
Poetry comes to say she wants to be an ode to what is
muddy. OK, baby. Here’s to dank difficult borders,
gardens of ingrown perennials, fractured fins,
the wings of inner menageries. Here’s to our own
empires of dirt — no one’s pruned-perfumed colonies
of exotic beauty. This is not a poem! Or is it
an efficient exercise in surviving hysteria?
~~~
All day I tried to distinguish
need from desire. Now, in the dark,
I feel only bitter sadness for us,
the builders, the planers of wood,
because I have been looking
steadily at these elms
and seen the process that creates
the writhing, stationary tree
is torment, and have understood
it will make no forms but twisted forms.
~~~
The nights have grown cool again, like the nights
of early spring, and quiet again. Will
speech disturb you? We're
alone now; we have no reason for silence.
Can you see, over the garden—the full moon rises.
I won't see the next full moon.
In spring, when the moon rose, it meant
time was endless. Snowdrops
opened and closed, the clustered
seeds of the maples fell in pale drifts.
White over white, the moon rose over the birch tree.
And in the crook, where the tree divides,
leaves of the first daffodils, in moonlight
soft greenish-silver.
We have come too far together toward the end now
to fear the end. These nights, I am no longer even certain
I know what the end means. And you, who've been with a man—
after the first cries,
doesn't joy, like fear, make no sound?
~~~
You and I thigh deep in Suwannee River then in a bathtub. Spanish moss clogs
the drain and a man carrying a green towel interrupts. We send him away once
more knowing he'll return to watch. We're photographers shooting on location
for Sylvia Plath's upcoming book, Savage Beauty—wrong poet or wrong book,
I know, depending on how you look at it—however, I'm the one who is white
this time, you're darker, maybe Quechua Indian or Spanish, like actor Antonio
Banderas, with very defined stomach muscles and a slick throb of a penis.
Years later I write a book about our affair. They bring me on one of those
daytime talk shows, and before being reunited, we are kept in separate rooms, the
television split screen, green-towel man in the audience. I'm still white, so are you,
both of us middle-aged with freckles and strawberry-blonde hair. Later I'm the
viewer at home thinking, Like hell they'll fall for each other.
~~~
They were not traditionalists.
They could bear the innovations
               of plot. They could not
wait to landscape the plot. They had plans
                              for a bed of pansies because pansies
                              hardly ever die
                                                            in a cold snap,
                              because pansies are hardy despite the name.
When they shoved the trowel
                                             into the soil
it was with his hand
                                             on the handle and hers                                                                            adding force.
They knew there were only
                                                            nine types of people in the world
and they knew which ones
would close the deal. They knew
the shirkers by sight.
                                             They had options.
They knew about Required Communication.
                              About how I feel and you feel.
When there was a question
                                             of who did the dishes
                                             and who did the cat box,
                                             it was settled in-house
                              and never required an outside contractor.
But the pansies got stem spot, leaf rot, and mildew.
When they looked at their options
               it seemed there weren’t really that many
                                                                                            after all.
They swore to uphold the bonds
                                                      and the principles
                                                      and the yelling.
They swore to oral sex.
They dressed to the nines and they walked the aisle.
They stood up and received the standard narration.
~~~
Little Box talks back
With a new set of teeth
And pink gums
A fake nose and a wax mustache
She disguises her voice
To sound like Groucho
 
 • 
Little Box opens up
And cries to her psychiatristI don’t know why they hate me
I’m such a sweetheart
I volunteer at the zoo
And teach Mandarin
To their bratty children
~~~
My lover, who lives far away, opens the door to my room
         and offers supper in a bowl made of his breath.
The stew has boiled and I wonder at the cat born from its steam.
The cat is in the bedroom now, mewling. The cat is indecent
          and I, who am trying to be tidy, I, who am trying to do things
          the proper way, I, who am sick from the shedding, I am undone.
My lover, who lives far away, opens the door to my room
          and offers pastries in a basket spun from his vision.
It is closely woven, the kind of container some women collect.
I have seen these in many colors, but the basket he brings is simple:
      only black, only nude. The basket he brings is full of sweet scones
       and I eat even the crumbs. As if I've not dined for days.
My lover, who lives far away, opens the door to my room
        and offers tea made from the liquid he's crying.
I do not want my lover crying and I am sorry I ever asked for tea.
My lover, who lives far away, opens the door to my room pretending
        he never cried. He offers tea and cold cakes. The tea is delicious:
        spiced like the start of our courtship, honeyed and warm.
I drink every bit of the tea and put aside the rest.
My lover, who lives far away, opens the door to my room
         like a man loving his strength. The lock I replaced
         this morning will not keep him away.
My lover, who lives far away, opens the door to my room
         and brings me nothing.
Perhaps he has noticed how fat I've grown, indulged.
Perhaps he is poor and sick of emptying his store.
It is no matter to me any longer, he has filled me, already, so full.
My lover who is far away opens the door to my room
         and tells me he is tired.
I do not ask what he's tired from for my lover, far away,
          has already disappeared.
The blankets are big with his body. The cat, under the covers,
          because it is cold out and she is not stupid, mews.
~~~
You flinch. Something flickers, not fleeing your face. My
Heart hammers at the ceiling, telling my tongue
To turn it down. Too late. The something climbs, leaps, is
Falling now across us like the prank of an icy, brainy
Lord. I chose the wrong word. I am wrong for not choosing
Merely to smile, to pull you toward me and away from
What you think of as that other me, who wanders lost among ...    
Among whom? The many? The rare? I wish you didn’t care.
I watch you watching her. Her very shadow is a rage
That trashes the rooms of your eyes. Do you claim surprise
At what she wants, the poor girl, pelted with despair,
Who flits from grief to grief? Isn’t it you she seeks? And
If you blame her, know that she blames you for choosing
Not her, but me. Love is never fair. But do we — should we — care?
 
~~~
Identification is a highly important factor in the mechanism of hysterical symptoms; by this means patients are enabled in their symptoms to represent not merely their own experiences, but the experiences of a great number of other persons, and can suffer, as it were, for a whole mass of people, and fill all the parts of a drama by means of their own personalities alone.
— Sigmund Freud



Anne identified with Cate until it became a bona fide
illness, for Boris had left Cate, resulting not only
in psychic estrangement but an unconscious stream
of hostility directed not at Boris, but at his new woman,
Anne, whom Cate viewed as her rival. Cate remained
excessively tender with Boris, though Cate, for him,
had been a “totem animal” from which he gained power
by “eating.” Whereas Boris was the patriarch,
Anne was the ego alien; and whereas Cate was Anne’s
fixation, Anne was no one’s obsession, so she was
admitted to a psychiatric ward with the unbidden
associations she could not be induced to abandon.
On the rare occasions she slept, the manifest and latent
content of her dreams was the dance of abandonment
between Boris and Cate, which Anne, in her waking hours,
projected onto the walls, as though screening a silent film.
She could not be induced to abandon this footage;
she could not be induced to abandon her object love
of Boris (whose own object choice was his
ego-libido); or her identification with Cate, who felt
no friendship towards Anne. Soon Anne drew a mental
triangle on every surface she saw, be it phallic or
concave, and sometimes this triangle was isosceles,
sometimes it was equilateral, and often it was right.
~~~
By the river years ago, recursive in memory, a
finite moment, the past ended. Future began.
The river flowed south. You were a man’s face
floating among stones.
By a river in autumn, willow leaves were yellow
whisks in updrafts. We were not alone.
Cottonwood boles twisted against banks, turtles
dozed in the roots, bark slivered into water.
The river sounded the swish of its name. You
waded the Neosho as it meandered east.
Two sandhill cranes fly overhead. Their legs
stretch straight behind as they swim through air.
Their grace is the river’s.
No one saw flood-seined silt, gravel, broken
mussel pearls. I stayed, you left.
By the river I met you each day. I meet you each
day. I will be meeting you in invariant futures.
By the river leaves turn. Mud cracks pentagonal
shapes. You return and leave. The river remains.
By the river I was a child, I am grown. I remember
water pooled, not moving.
~~~
Love me because I am lost;
Love me that I am undone.
That is brave,—no man has wished it,
Not one.
 
Be strong, to look on my heart
As others look on my face.
Love me,—I tell you that it is a ravaged
Terrible place.
 
~~~
If by real you mean as real as a shark tooth stuck
in your heel, the wetness of a finished lollipop stick,
the surprise of a thumbtack in your purse—
then Yes, every last page is true, every nuance,
bit, and bite. Wait. I have made them up—all of them—
and when I say I am married, it means I marriedall of them, a whole neighborhood of past loves.
Can you imagine the number of bouquets, how many
slices of cake? Even now, my husbands plan a great meal
for us—one chops up some parsley, one stirs a bubbling pot
on the stove. One changes the baby, and one sleeps
in a fat chair. One flips through the newspaper, another
whistles while he shaves in the shower, and every single
one of them wonders what time I am coming home.
~~~
                           this is
                          exactly
                       the kind
                       of space
                      I want to
           follow you into
      holding your little
mute worm on a twig
make it marble
make it touch like tough winter
in the next life we will have longer love
better places with extended embraces
now we leave the song to return to the front
    leaf closing on closeness of
    mothers in the next worldoverseeing premiumwaste of the planetreincarnateanywherebut here
   land on a different rim
~~~
When love was a question, the message arrived
in the beak of a wire and plaster bird. The coloratura
was hardly to be believed. For flight,
it took three stagehands: two
on the pulleys and one on the flute. And you
thought fancy rained like grace.
Our fog machine lost in the Parcel Post, we improvised
with smoke. The heroine dies of tuberculosis after all.
Remorse and the raw night air: any plausible tenor
might cough. The passions, I take my clues
from an obvious source, may be less like climatic events
than we conventionalize, though I’ve heard
of tornadoes that break the second-best glassware
and leave everything else untouched.
There’s a finer conviction than seamlessness
elicits: the Greeks knew a god
by the clanking behind his descent.
The heart, poor pump, protests till you’d think
it’s rusted past redemption, but
there’s tuning in these counterweights,
celebration’s assembled voice.
~~~
I see them standing at the formal gates of their colleges,
I see my father strolling out
under the ochre sandstone arch, the   
red tiles glinting like bent
plates of blood behind his head, I
see my mother with a few light books at her hip
standing at the pillar made of tiny bricks,
the wrought-iron gate still open behind her, its
sword-tips aglow in the May air,
they are about to graduate, they are about to get married,   
they are kids, they are dumb, all they know is they are   
innocent, they would never hurt anybody.   
I want to go up to them and say Stop,   
don’t do it—she’s the wrong woman,   
he’s the wrong man, you are going to do things
you cannot imagine you would ever do,   
you are going to do bad things to children,
you are going to suffer in ways you have not heard of,
you are going to want to die. I want to go
up to them there in the late May sunlight and say it,
her hungry pretty face turning to me,   
her pitiful beautiful untouched body,
his arrogant handsome face turning to me,   
his pitiful beautiful untouched body,   
but I don’t do it. I want to live. I   
take them up like the male and female   
paper dolls and bang them together   
at the hips, like chips of flint, as if to   
strike sparks from them, I say
Do what you are going to do, and I will tell about it.
~~~
It was a singles cruise but it wasn’t a singles cruise:each participant simulated detachment but nonewas actually single. Some, like the recently widowed,were attached to ghosts. Others were legally attachedto a living person they once but no longer loved.A surprising number loved their partners profoundlywhile fearing said partners inhabited the categoryof those who loved them no longer. These participants,whose fears may or may not have been founded,attempted to self-protect by labeling themselves single.Soon a pattern emerged: those who feared abandonmentdeveloped around them a planetary-like orbitof potential new partners to whom they could not attachbecause they were already attached. Such orbits lasted,sometimes, for years. The orbiters went to self-help groupsand/or analysts and/or wrote letters to advice columnists.Because they could not detach from their objects of unrequitedaffection, they became the predominant clientele for futuresingles cruises, unilaterally sustaining the singles cruise business.
~~~
The whole trick of this thing    ...    is to get out of your own light.                       — Marianne Faithfull



She said she sang very close to the miketo change the space. And I changed the spaceby striding down the Boulevard Raspail at dusk in tight jeansuntil an Algerian engineer plucked the pen from my back pocket.As if you’re inside my head and you’re hearing the song from in there.He came from the desert, I camefrom green suburbs. We understoodnothing of one another over glasses of metallic red wine.I was playing Girl. He playedMan. Several plots were afoot, allmisfiring. One had to do with my skimpy black shirtand light hair, his broad shoulders and hungerafter months on an oil rig. Anotherwas untranslatable. Apollinaireburned his fingers on June’s smoldering lyrebut I had lost my pen. The engineerread only construction manuals. His roomwas dim and narrow and no,the story didn’t slide that way though there are many waysto throw oneself away.One singer did it by living by a broken walluntil she shredded her voice but still she offered each song,she said, like an Appalachian artifact.Like trash along the riverbank chafing at the quayplastic bottles a torn shirt fractured dollsthrough which the current chortles an intimate tune.
~~~
It's just me throwing myself at you,
romance as usual, us times us,
not lust but moxibustion,
a substance burning close
to the body as possible
withut risk of immolation.
Nearness without contact
causes numbness. Analgesia.
Pins and needles. As the snugness
of the surgeon's glove causes hand fatigue.
At least this procedure
requires no swag or goody bags,
stuff bestowed upon the stars
at their luxe functions.
There's no dress code,
though leg irons
are always appropriate.
And if anyone says what the hell
are you wearing in Esperanto
—Kion diable vi portas?—
tell them anguish
is the universal language.
Stars turn to trainwrecks
and my heart goes out
admirers gush. Ground to a velvet!
But never mind the downside,
mon semblable, mon crush.
Love is just the retaliation of light.
It is so profligate, you know,
so rich with rush.
~~~
I want the hole in my ear to be quietAnd inside the hole in my ear to be quietAnd I want it to tell me what to doOr I will go to my lover’s mouthAnd say oh my quietI am comingAnd tell the quiet how its kingdom should be madeThough the quiet has already eaten meBecause the quiet loves meBut does the lover love meAnd why must the quiet be so quietAnd why can’t the quiet have a cockAnd where is its violet mouthIts ten fingers with which to fix meAnd where is its belly breathingAnd O I want to be fixedBut I am already fixedWhy don’t I feel it
~~~
      to be
                              gone a
                  constant desire
         embarrassed for the    
   giant leaning in for love
   we had enough
of
   the dance number but                   the whirling begins
  it just starts   silos full of air   no more corn   no more wheat  watching myself for  full details in a strange man’s pants  we let
            the soldier board the plane
              shot in head three days later
               why are you angry you said
                 why are you not I said
~~~
After twenty years of marriage, we walked out
of the bush and on to a rough dirt road
we followed till we saw a pond
we might be able to get to.
The ground was boggy and buzzing.
The pond was thick with weed
and slime. It was not
the sort of pond anyone would
swim in, but we did — picking and sliding
into the water over the bog and bees,
bees we suddenly noticed were
everywhere, were settling on our hair
as we swam, ducks turning surprised eyes
our way. After twenty years of marriage
what is surprising isn’t really so much
the person you are with but to find
yourselves so out of place in this scene, cold
but not able to get out without
stepping over bees, so many bees.
~~~
in my house. Days we’re ordinary,
affectionate, a close,
happy couple, but nights
require a passport and serious
immunizations, warnings about
security and guerilla attacks.
You are a foreign ruler,
quite possibly benevolent
in intention – but we know how
these things always play out,
don’t we? – with needs alien
to and hostile to your citizenry,
me, without power
except to say, “No more,”
and hope to survive
the fallout from the battles
in the streets. Days, we’re
the peaceful, devoted
pair all our friends envy.
Nights are always tense
around the DMZ that is our bed
with occasional forays into the bush
where the enemy is always lying
in wait. Sleep is hard, fearful
and troubled. I dream us
going down in flames.
~~~
I take off my shirt, I show you.
I shaved the hair out under my arms.
I roll up my pants, I scraped off the hair   
on my legs with a knife, getting white.
My hair is the color of chopped maples.   
My eyes dark as beans cooked in the south.   
(Coal fields in the moon on torn-up hills)
Skin polished as a Ming bowl
showing its blood cracks, its age, I have hundreds   
of names for the snow, for this, all of them quiet.
In the night I come to you and it seems a shame   
to waste my deepest shudders on a wall of a man.
You recognize strangers,
think you lived through destruction.
You can’t explain this night, my face, your memory.
You want to know what I know?   
Your own hands are lying.
~~~
For Fred



I could pick anything and think of you—  This lamp, the wind-still rain, the glossy blue  My pen exudes, drying matte, upon the page.  I could choose any hero, any cause or age  And, sure as shooting arrows to the heart,  Astride a dappled mare, legs braced as far apart  As standing in silver stirrups will allow—  There you'll be, with furrowed brow  And chain mail glinting, to set me free:  One eye smiling, the other firm upon the enemy.  This post-postmodern age is all business: compact disks  And faxes, a do-it-now-and-take-no-risks  Event. Today a hurricane is nudging up the coast,  Oddly male: Big Bad Floyd, who brings a host  Of daydreams: awkward reminiscences  Of teenage crushes on worthless boys  Whose only talent was to kiss you senseless.  They all had sissy names—Marcel, Percy, Dewey;  Were thin as licorice and as chewy,  Sweet with a dark and hollow center. Floyd's  Cussing up a storm. You're bunkered in your  Aerie, I'm perched in mine  (Twin desks, computers, hardwood floors):  We're content, but fall short of the Divine.  Still, it's embarrassing, this happiness—  Who's satisfied simply with what's good for us,  When has the ordinary ever been news?  And yet, because nothing else will do  To keep me from melancholy (call it blues),  I fill this stolen time with you.
~~~
She cannot imagine it otherwise.
She wakes in the morning and twists her ring,
loves how every night in their bed he lies
 
breathing warm in the dark and never shies
away. He lets her talk, he lets her sing.
She cannot imagine it otherwise.
 
One night she’s surprised how gently he tries
to move her arm when he thinks she’s sleeping.
In the night, in their bed, she sees he lies
 
watching the ceiling long before sunrise.
Too much coffee, too many late nights working.
She cannot imagine it otherwise.
 
He quiets. The more she worries and pries
the less he tells her about anything.
She’s sure every night in their bed he lies
 
wanting a room beyond reach of her eyes.
He sighs—she cries so much, Over nothing.
She cannot imagine it otherwise:
Every night in their bed, he lies.
~~~
Didn’t Sappho say her guts clutched up like this?
Before a face suddenly numinous,
her eyes watered, knees melted. Did she lactate   
again, milk brought down by a girl’s kiss?   
It’s documented torrents are unloosed
by such events as recently produced
not the wish, but the need, to consume, in us,   
one pint of Maalox, one of Kaopectate.
My eyes and groin are permanently swollen,   
I’m alternatingly brilliant and witless
—and sleepless: bed is just a swamp to roll in.   
Although I’d cream my jeans touching your breast,   
sweetheart, it isn’t lust; it’s all the rest
of what I want with you that scares me shitless.
~~~
Forbear, bold youth, all’s Heaven here,
 And what you do aver,To others, courtship may appear,
 ’Tis sacriledge to her.She is a publick deity,
 And were’t not very oddShe should depose her self to be
 A pretty household god?First make the sun in private shine,
 And bid the world adieu,That so he may his beams confine
 In complement to you.But if of that you do despair,
 Think how you did amiss,To strive to fix her beams which are
 More bright and large than this.
~~~
Shadows lengthened while we sat stuck in traffic just beyond San Rafael. Headlights had begun to flare in the cool dusk. The hum of the car's engine lulled me, and I put my forehead against the glass, looking out over a darkening landscape. We were headed to the Bishop's Ranch, a weekend retreat for Episcopal Young Churchmen in hilly country that would someday produce superlative wines with garnet hues that stain the inside of a glass. I was queasy from the lurching of the car, the stops and starts, the smell of exhaust. Though trembling with cold, I was too shy to ask the lady, the mother of one of the other girls, to turn on the heater. I imagined pale pink blossoms on the Japanese plum, apple trees laden with white flowers, and north of Sebastapol the vibrant yellow of daffodils on slender, pleated stems. That night I slept in a single bunk made up with thin sheets and blankets.
 
A warm sun the next day restored me, but in the evening, seated by the fire that crackled in the fireplace of the big lodge, I felt flushed. Our recently ordained curate (we were not to know he was gay till some years later) had asked me to bring my guitar, and now he wanted me to sing about the girl who decides to sleep next to her mother her whole life long instead of falling for an unfaithful suitor. I sang; we all sang together. Young Father W. had a wonderful tenor voice. His smile reassured me, but now I was tired and, earlier than the others, I decided to return to the dorm.
 
In that clear March night, the sky gleamed like black ink and stars blazed, bright and alive. Walking downhill, guitar in hand, I suddenly stumbled with dizziness, and the slope swam before me. “Hold on, hold on,” I told myself as I nearly fell onto the dew-slick lawn. For a moment I could sense myself floating away from my body. Back in the dorm, I crawled into bed and lay shuddering with cold, bones aching. The room seemed to spin. I wanted to be home, but the thought of facing my mother filled me with terrible dismay. I knew the blue failure notice mailed by the school would have arrived.
 
Sure enough, it lay open on the dining table when I got home the following afternoon. A Sunday fog, hardly a mist, had blown in from the bay and was gathering in the eucalyptus across the ravine. The house was steamy. A basket of clean laundry occupied a chair atop a stack of San Francisco Chronicles. Mom sat at the table sewing, but I knew she was scowling. I thought it wise to look industrious, so I began to fold towels and pillowcases. “What I want to know,” began my mother, “is whether you have any ambition? Obviously, you will never get to college. What do you expect to do with your life?” She paused, and I shrugged. “Go ahead and shrug. Do you think your girlfriend is going to take care of you? That won’t last long. And why is it you only fall in love with girls? Well, I suppose you want to be a boy.” What an unutterable failure I am. I retreated, burned by her ferocious, upright anger. “Oh, yes, I’m sure you’re sick! But you will go to school tomorrow!”
 
That night, wracked again with cold, unable to stop my trembling, I sought my parents’ bed, stood moaning till Mom woke and let me under the covers, where she tried to warm me with her body. Weeks later we learned that one of my classmates, a robust girl who shot baskets as well as any boy, had succumbed to the illness and died. That night, my mother placed her hand on my forehead–her smooth palm, her touch, gentle–and said to my barely awake dad, “Our daughter has a raging fever.” Like a miracle, I was still her child. Comforted, I slept.
~~~
At first you didn’t know me.
I was a shape moving rapidly, nervous 
at the edge of your vision. A flat, high voice,
dark slash of hair across my cheekbone. 
I made myself present, though never distinct.
Things I said that he repeated, a tone 
you could hear, but never trace, in his voice.
Silence—followed by talk of other things. 
When you would sit at your desk, I would creep
near you like a question. A thought would scurry 
across the front of your mind. I’d be there,
ducking out of sight. You must have felt me 
watching you, my small eyes fixed on your face,
the smile you wondered at, on the lips only. 
The voice on the phone, quick and full of business.
All that you saw and heard and could not find 
the center of, those days growing into years,
growing inside of you, out of reach, now with you 
forever, in your house, in your garden, in corridors
of dream where I finally tell you my name.
~~~
Learning to love differently is hard,
love with the hands wide open, love
with the doors banging on their hinges,
the cupboard unlocked, the wind
roaring and whimpering in the rooms
rustling the sheets and snapping the blinds
that thwack like rubber bands
in an open palm.
It hurts to love wide open
stretching the muscles that feel
as if they are made of wet plaster,
then of blunt knives, then
of sharp knives.
It hurts to thwart the reflexes
of grab, of clutch ; to love and let
go again and again. It pesters to remember
the lover who is not in the bed,
to hold back what is owed to the work
that gutters like a candle in a cave
without air, to love consciously,
conscientiously, concretely, constructively.
I can’t do it, you say it’s killing
me, but you thrive, you glow
on the street like a neon raspberry,
You float and sail, a helium balloon
bright bachelor’s button blue and bobbing
on the cold and hot winds of our breath,
as we make and unmake in passionate
diastole and systole the rhythm
of our unbound bonding, to have
and not to hold, to love
with minimized malice, hunger
and anger moment by moment balanced.
~~~
Does my little son miss the smell
of his first mother? I wonder
as the mewl of his mouth
opens toward a plastic bottle
that is not her breast.
 
Sudden new mother,
I bury my nose deep
into his skullcap of ringlets,
his starry cheesiness.
 
In her good-bye letter to him
sealed in his album
with a birth certificate, which now
list my name as Mother,
 
his first mother writes
she nursed him briefly
after he emerged into
the second room of his world.
 
I think of milk, volcanic
and insistent, answering
the newborn’s gigantic thirst,
a primal agreement between
generosity and greed.
 
Sometimes I press my nose
to the glass of that place
where a mother and my child
belong to each other;
I cannot imagine coming
between them.
 
But then I want to lick him all over
with a cow’s thick tongue,
to taste him and mark him as mine
so if the other mother returns,
she will refuse her handled calf
smeared with my smell.
 
~~~
They are a gift I have wanted again.
Wanted: One moment in mountains
when winter got so cold
the oil froze before it could burn.
I chopped ferns of hoarfrost from all the windows
and peered up at pines, a wedding cake
by a baker gone mad. Swirls by the thousand
shimmered above me until a cloud
lumbered over a ridge,
bringing the heavier white of more flurries.
I believed, I believed, I believed
it would last, that when you went out
to test the black ice or to dig out a Volkswagon
filled with rich women, you’d return
and we’d sputter like oil,
match after match, warm in the making.
Wisconsin’s flat farmland never approved:
I hid in cornfields far into October,
listening to music that whirled from my thumbprint.
When sunset played havoc with bright leaves of alders,
I never mentioned longing or fear.
I crouched like a good refugee in brown creeks
and forgot why Autumn is harder than Spring.
But snug on the western slope of that mountain
I’d accept every terror, break open seals
to release love’s headwaters to unhurried sunlight.
Weren’t we Big Hearts? Through some trick of silver
we held one another, believing each motion the real one,
ah, lover, why were dark sources bundled up
in our eyes? Each owned an agate,
marbled with anguish, a heart or its echo,
we hardly knew. Lips touching lips,
did that break my horizon
as much as those horses broke my belief?
You drove off and I walked the old road,
scolding the doubles that wanted so much.
The chestnut mare whinnied a cloud into scrub pine.
In a windless corner of a corral,
four horses fit like puzzle pieces.
Their dark eyes and lashes defined by the white.
The colt kicked his hind, loped from the fence.
The mares and a stallion galloped behind,
lifting and leaping, finding each other
in full accord with the earth and their bodies.
No harm ever touched them once they cut loose,
snorting at flurries falling again.
How little our chances for feeling ourselves.
They vanished so quickly—one flick of a tail.
Where do their mountains and moments begin?
I stood a long time in sharpening wind.
 
~~~
Stepping over the stones of my mother,
chicken bones, straw,
 
the cellar in which the man was found,
that man my grandfather
 
the day the sharecroppers left town,
their son shot dead —
 
the thing whiskey’ll do to a man.
 
The woman who waited under the house at night,
counting ghosts and bobcats through lattice of leaves,
 
walking bare-boned lanes,
toes buried beneath blackened leaves —
 
no cause for worry
if you’ve walked every acre, planted every row.
 
Nothing can get you if you pay it no mind.
 
I tell you these things
so you’ll not mistake my actions for fear,
 
not think I do not know what makes a life,
what makes people do the things they do.
 
I know my fears — I’ve named them,
counted them out one by one
 
like tarot cards, voodoo dolls:
 
birth,
death,
poverty,
obscurity,
that you will leave me,
or I will leave you.
~~~
In my heart the old love  
 Struggled with the new,  It was ghostly waking  
 All night through.   Dear things, kind things  
 That my old love said,  Ranged themselves reproachfully  
 Round my bed.   But I could not heed them,  
 For I seemed to see  Dark eyes of my new love  
 Fixed on me.   Old love, old love,  
 How can I be true?  Shall I be faithless to myself  
 Or to you?
~~~
The clouds as I see them, rising   
urgently, roseate in the   
mounting of somber power
surging in evening haste over   
roofs and hermetic   
grim walls—
                          Last night
as if death had lit a pale light
in your flesh, your flesh
was cold to my touch, or not cold   
but cool, cooling, as if the last traces   
of warmth were still fading in you.
My thigh burned in cold fear where   
yours touched it.
But I forced to mind my vision of a sky   
close and enclosed, unlike the space in which these clouds move—
a sky of gray mist it appeared—
and how looking intently at it we saw
its gray was not gray but a milky white
in which radiant traces of opal greens,
fiery blues, gleamed, faded, gleamed again,
and how only then, seeing the color in the gray,   
a field sprang into sight, extending
between where we stood and the horizon,
a field of freshest deep spiring grass   
starred with dandelions,
green and gold
gold and green alternating in closewoven   
chords, madrigal field.
Is death’s chill that visited our bed   
other than what it seemed, is it   
a gray to be watched keenly?
Wiping my glasses and leaning westward,   
clearing my mind of the day’s mist and leaning   
into myself to see
the colors of truth
I watch the clouds as I see them   
in pomp advancing, pursuing   
the fallen sun.
~~~
The face of all the world is changed, I think, Since first I heard the footsteps of thy soul Move still, oh, still, beside me, as they stole Betwixt me and the dreadful outer brink Of obvious death, where I, who thought to sink, Was caught up into love, and taught the whole Of life in a new rhythm. The cup of dole God gave for baptism, I am fain to drink, And praise its sweetness, Sweet, with thee anear. The names of country, heaven, are changed away For where thou art or shalt be, there or here; And this ... this lute and song ... loved yesterday, (The singing angels know) are only dear, Because thy name moves right in what they say.
~~~
I try to think of the cup of a hand,  of legs in a tangle, and not the thistle  though even it, purpled, spiking away,  wants to be admired, wants to say, whistle  a little for me. O every little thing wants to be loved, wants to be marked by the cry  that brings desire to it, even blue-eyed fly  to the bloated hiss of death. To love is to be remiss:  the horse alone in the wide flat field nods its head as if the bridle and bit were missed  or mocked; the cow slung with the unmilked weight  of her tremendous teats shoots a look back over her shoulder  at O lonesome me. I want to say to her need            as if crooning could be enough,  sweet, sweet mama . . . truth be told,  the thousand lisping bees to the milkweeds' honey  terrifies me. When the stink of slurry season  is over and the greened fields are slathered, fecund,  overtall foxgloves tip with the weight of their fruit.  Then I dream a little dream of you  and me, curled like two grubs on the top of a leaf  wind-driven and scudding along the lake's surface.  All night we glide to its blue harbor  and back again. The fattened slack of us  singing O darlin' darlin'  darlin'.
~~~
It’s a wave, isn’t it? Not a particle.

A fresh, cool wave, so why am I flushed

and not washed? Why dirtier than before?

 

 

1. Etymology

 

On the subject of our names.

They’re so embracing,

thinking they’re all us

 

and swallowing themselves

into our nausea.

 

Yet we never quite die on the spot.

We put off being what we’re called,

we take the hint.

 

Time is never wasted.

It is always spent.

 

 

2. Teleology

 

Sheer fabric trailing through 4 a.m.

I thought it was opaque and earlier.

 

 

3. Mathematics

 

I know you know I know.

And the mirror multiplies inside.

 

The world is no bigger, but next time

do the math,

 

because I wanted to know none

of what I now know twice.

 

 

4. The Principle of the Borg

 

Saying “There’s no one like me”

accomplishes the exact opposite

of what you mean.

 

It is true only insofar as it is true

for everyone equally.

 

So it means you are not special

in any way. Which should be enough for you.

 

 

5. Documentary

 

This clothing, a maladaptive wrapping,

cuts me up. I am a vignette,

 

floated knowingly

since I pulled myself through myself,

 

like a unitard. Too many eyeholes

 

have been cut and pieced together

to make flesh less various with others.

 

 

6. Medicine

 

The cure for embarrassment

is substitution.

 

Strap, don’t pluck.

Baldness makes headlines.

 

Use grass. Use less.

Shorts under your skirt for recess.

 

Redo the surfaces of your wrong turns to make

taking them smoother in the future.

 

 

7. Cosmology

 

Things are less embarrassing

at the cellular level. Remember?

 

We were a whole part of the universe

before Mother busted the party.

 

Before we were ourselves.

Now, like dirty soap, we

 

attract what we repel.

 

 

8. Apology

 

Even the clumsiest fate is perfectly shaped,

so the view took over looking

 

but the sweetest thing I’ve ever known

is obscene with a beautiful

 

sugar rotted down to its truth.

 

Loving you a serious accidental shame

and day flatulates into night,

 

trips and falls in front of millions

into morning.

 

In thrall to this pocus:

the end of fear starts

 

with such an annihilating blush,

with such a stutter.
~~~
Parc Georges-Brassens, Paris



Most afternoons, I’d run laps through Parc Brassens   where grows the second smallest vineyard   I have ever seen, and where those silver,   pruned-back stalks looked blunt,   strung-out on wires, and mostly dead   all winter. That was how I saw them.   That’s all I expected. Even in the cold,   I’d see a guy my age there, once a week,   playing his guitar. He’d sit next to the bench   where I’d be stretching. He rarely spoke—   just to ask if I’d like a song—   until the week before I left for good.   I was sitting at the top of a hill   about a hundred feet away from where   if you stand tiptoe you can see the Eiffel Tower.   He sat too close to me. We spoke of many things.   Then he suggested we go at it right there,   on the ground, under the sun. This is how   one lives who knows that she will die:   rolling in the arms of anyone when she can—   rolling in the arms of a musician—aware   that no one cares much what we do in little knolls behind reedy forsythia,   in the middle of a Tuesday, in the middle   of living. And I would know now   how he felt, and the ground against me,   and whether he was rough or sweet.   And what is possible would widen every hour.   Oh, but me, I thought I was immortal.
~~~
Naked or not, I’m a costume that moves, figurine with a face that changes. You could call me a mood. I begin cheerful but sometimes turn solemn when confronted with my own mythology (wolf in a cape, cat scratch on a cupboard door, mouse tail in the hand of a bland farmer’s wife, a drop of blood on her shoe). Today’s beginning ended in a dream. In a fantastical bed, a lover leaned in to kiss me just as I realized I was part machine, part primitive urge. I left the bed and said, You know, don’t you, not everyone is so disposed. And then I heard from inside my head, You should say, not everyone is so disposed to your utopia. Only then did I realize I’d been inexact. Even here there are scolds that tell you how to be. Sometimes they live inside. Naked or not, I am trying to tuck my arms invisibly behind my back so that all you can see are my breasts and my highly simplified head.
~~~
Can these movements which move themselves
be the substance of my attraction?
Where does this thin green silk come from that covers my body?
Surely any woman wearing such fabrics
would move her body just to feel them touching every part of her.
Yet most of the women frown, or look away, or laugh stiffly.
They are afraid of these materials and these movements
in some way.
The psychologists would say they are afraid of themselves, somehow.
Perhaps awakening too much desire—
that their men could never satisfy?
So they keep themselves laced and buttoned and made up
in hopes that the framework will keep them stiff enough not to feel
the whole register.
In hopes that they will not have to experience that unquenchable
desire for rhythm and contact.
If a snake glided across this floor
most of them would faint or shrink away.
Yet that movement could be their own.
That smooth movement frightens them—
awakening ancestors and relatives to the tips of the arms and toes.
So my bare feet
and my thin green silks
my bells and finger cymbals
offend them—frighten their old-young bodies.
While the men simper and leer—
glad for the vicarious experience and exercise.
They do not realize how I scorn them;
or how I dance for their frightened,
unawakened, sweet
women.
~~~
And now I have another lad!
    No longer need you tell
How all my nights are slow and sad
    For loving you too well.
His ways are not your wicked ways,
    He's not the like of you.
He treads his path of reckoned days,
    A sober man, and true.
They'll never see him in the town,
    Another on his knee.
He'd cut his laden orchards down,
   If that would pleasure me.
He'd give his blood to paint my lips
    If I should wish them red.
He prays to touch my finger-tips
   Or stroke my prideful head.
He never weaves a glinting lie,
    Or brags the hearts he'll keep.
I have forgotten how to sigh—
    Remembered how to sleep.
He's none to kiss away my mind—
    A slower way is his.
Oh, Lord! On reading this, I find
    A silly lot he is.
 
~~~
I Love me Sweet, with all thou art,    Feeling, thinking, seeing; Love me in the lightest part,    Love me in full being. II Love me with thine open youth    In its frank surrender; With the vowing of thy mouth,    With its silence tender. III Love me with thine azure eyes,    Made for earnest granting; Taking colour from the skies,    Can Heaven’s truth be wanting? IV Love me with their lids, that fall    Snow-like at first meeting; Love me with thine heart, that all    Neighbours then see beating. V Love me with thine hand stretched out    Freely—open-minded: Love me with thy loitering foot,—    Hearing one behind it. VI Love me with thy voice, that turns    Sudden faint above me; Love me with thy blush that burns    When I murmur Love me! VII Love me with thy thinking soul,    Break it to love-sighing; Love me with thy thoughts that roll    On through living—dying. VIII Love me when in thy gorgeous airs,    When the world has crowned thee; Love me, kneeling at thy prayers,    With the angels round thee. IX Love me pure, as musers do,    Up the woodlands shady: Love me gaily, fast and true    As a winsome lady. X Through all hopes that keep us brave,    Farther off or nigher, Love me for the house and grave,    And for something higher. XI Thus, if thou wilt prove me, Dear,    Woman’s love no fable. I will love thee—half a year—    As a man is able. 
~~~
I do not know where either of us can turn Just at first, waking from the sleep of each other. I do not know how we can bear The river struck by the gold plummet of the moon, Or many trees shaken together in the darkness. We shall wish not to be alone And that love were not dispersed and set free— Though you defeat me, And I be heavy upon you. But like earth heaped over the heart Is love grown perfect. Like a shell over the beat of life Is love perfect to the last. So let it be the same Whether we turn to the dark or to the kiss of another; Let us know this for leavetaking, That I may not be heavy upon you, That you may blind me no more. 
~~~
I.
Here is a place where declarations
are made/where the heart takes precedence
the gleam goes bland
This is the heart part/intense improvisation
on the I/THOU axis
pity the poor actors (darlings)dust
in their throats (choking) dialogue ancient
(concentrated chatter dictated by clouds)
click of whispers
dammed up phrases     {mythologizing always)
Moans move through their limbs like wind through
Trees talking mad talk 'cross the illuminated
Avenues of hard cities.
II.
Take the skin
Take off the skin
Remove the vital organs one by one
especially the heart
What is left
The skeleton
The skeleton is made of calcium
magnesium, phosphorous et cetera:
an amazing catalogue of chemicals
You are holding in your arms
an amazing catalogue of chemicals
The elements clash tenderly
Sparking compounds that move like eels
Under touch.
III.
Dime falls, your voice rises (fevered)
It's keen, the way the wind whips this
Garbage up and around like a father
Swinging his baby we are holding hands
And yes, giggling no force can stop us now
We are singing all the James Brown songs
We know helpess off-key, but exhilarated
Columbus Avenue breakdown: how the puddles
In the sidewalks radiate splendor/glass
Broken against high-rise buildings beckon
We are hungry the shifting children salsa
And you may be our feast, please linger
You offer me your laughter
I take the sweat from y our cheeks and hum.
IV.
Taste like tears—sea flaked and heated—
Taste like try again and get nowhere,
Maybe, this is the sonnet that mimes itself
Sequences silent and perceptive
The "might have saids"
The stomach-eating rage
The power of conversation is in its
Possibilities of Interpretation
(here's where the mime becomes important
because the words sound so dumb)
And here's where the anxiety dance gets choreographed.
It goes like this: You turn clockwise.
I turn Counter-Clockwise. We stop, stumble
Resolve our steps. Begin again.
V.
You slipped into something dangerous
after attending to your intimate conferences
Thirsty friends forever requesting water
Or is it blood they want?            Your blood. 
Somebody's screaming. Is it me?
Here on the side street being a sideshow
For passersby. You put on your silver armor.
I have only my quaint devotion.
It is not enough.            You say
I can't eat your food, baby, but I sitll like your cooking.
Did I trip?         Did you?    That Mingus
record is still revolving. You smile
serenely.             I can barely breathe.
VI.
If I could waste myself, I'd do it here
In public. Curse your name till my tongue bled.
The same tongue that searched out the
darkest spot on your back and licked it like chocolate.
Curse your name like you were some
Broken god in need of further profaning.
But I am no good at playing: victim.
Sadness is so private. These tears on the
Uptown Express. Take that tired song off
the constant stereo. It keeps reminding me
That what brought me to you was music.
You said you never lied to me. Fucker.
You take the exit sign home with you.
But I won't become invisible.
~~~
For Max Rojas



Once a month when the moon loses everything, Don Max takes a chair to the edge of the sea. Black sand beach & green-backed heron. The moon  casts off her milkglass earrings. I am nothing, she says, but black & white. I keep losing my face. Don Max feels for his pipe in his pocket. Takes it, knocks it against his palm. I am old! She cries. I get gooseflesh in the dark. Don Max is looking for his tobacco. Don Max has found a match. You don’t know how hard it is to come back from nothing.  Don Max smiles & lights up.  I keep making the same mistakes, she says. I think you should leave me, she says.  Through smoke, she watches Don Max fold a strip of seaweed into a grasshopper. Leave me for your own good! She demands. Don Max has set the grasshopper in the sand. Besides, I am too beautiful.  She speaks it as though it makes her sad. I’ll find other lovers. I will forget you.
~~~
We could hear her
knocking down strands of cobweb
from ceilings—sticky filaments,
sacs of eggs—as we woke most mornings
to a worm of discontent.
It lodged beneath the heart,
rubbed our frayed nerves,
gnawed at the gut, spleen,
ovaries. Filth
 
was Mom's first enemy, so each day
began with ritual cleaning: the stab
and sweep of the broom down the dark hall,
over the stained and scratched oak floors.
 
For weeks, she held her dust mop
one-handed, and with the other
cupped a hernia, while she swore
at us kids in that hard voice—a litany of our sins
and failures: sloth,
stupidity, secrecy.
 
We watched her
smash the spiders that ran, herky-jerky,
along the baseboards, while we ran, too.
 
Glaring at each other,
we gathered up the scattered
laundry, our father’s shoes,
his newspapers and tools, our books,
drawings, music, sweatshirts,
and jackets, whatever
we’d left lying around.
 
We were guilty, but good
at evasion. We cultivated
shrewish or obsessive behaviors of our own: my tough
older sister sneered and stalked out of the house
to meet her boyfriend;
my sweet younger sister
trembled and cried, comforted
by one of our many dogs.
I slammed doors, pounded them
with my fists, screamed, “Shut up,
shut up, shut up!” She couldn’t
 
leave us alone. She loved us
too much.
 
Though we were quick, she was
quicker. Her words stung.
 
We must have deserved it.
~~~
1. brett returns my mother to the wilderness
I slipped them into my friend’s palm — 
the tiny crucifix, and dove,
from off my mother’s pendant watch — 
and I asked her to walk them up through the brush
toward timberline, and find a place
to hurl them, for safekeeping. Now,
she writes, “I walked up the canyon at dusk,
warm, with a touch of fall blowing down the canyon,
came to an outcrop, above a steep
drop — far below, a seasonal
creek, green willows. I stood on a boulder
and held out my hand. I wished your mother all the
love in the world, and I sent the talismans
flying off the cliff. They were so small,
and the wind was blowing, so I never saw or
heard them land.” My mother is where
I cannot find her, she is gone beyond
recall, she lies in her sterling shapes
light as the most weightless bone in the body, her
stirrup bone, which was ground up
and sown into the sea. I do not know
what a soul is, I think of it
as the smallest, the core, civil right. And she
is wild now with it, she touches and is
touched by no one knows — down, or
droppings of a common nighthawk,
root of bird’s foot fern, antenna of
Hairstreak or Echo Azure, or stepped on by the
huge translucent Jerusalem cricket. There was
something deeply right about
the physical elements — atoms, and cells,
and marrow — of my mother’s body,
when I was young, and now her delicate
insignias receive the direct
touch of the sun, and scatter it,
unseen, all over her home.
 
 2. cross and dove  
I had not wanted them, and I hadn’t known
what to do with them, the minuscule
symbols of my mother’s religion,
I looked for a crack in the stone floor of the
cathedral but could not find one. Then I thought
of the wilderness near Desolation,
and asked my friend to carry them up
to a peak of granite, and let the wind take them. Since
then, it has been as if my mother’s
spirit matter has been returned
into the great bank of matter,
as her marrow had been sifted down into
the ocean. It doesn’t matter, now, if I
ever wanted to disassemble
my mother. The sixteenth-of-an-inch-
across cross, and the silver line drawing
of a dove are cached, somewhere, that is nowhere
to be found. Now I think of the nature of metal, and how
long the soul-dolls of her trust will last in their
spider-egg-sac of roots, needles,
quartz, feathers, dust, snow, shed
claw. Her belief she would have an eternal
life was absolute, I think.
It would not be good to think of my mother
without her God — like a hermit howling in the
moonscape of a desert. Once, when she was old — like an
exquisite child playing a crone
in the school play — we talked about heaven.
She wasn’t sure exactly how, but she
knew her father would be there, and her elder
brother, and her second husband —
maybe it was a heaven for four,
the three men and her. It was so
easy to make my mother happy
in her last years, to tell her that I
could just see her, as a kitten, in God’s
lap, being petted. Her eyes sparkled with more
beams than any other eyes I have seen.
I have sent the tokens of her everlasting being
into the high altitude.
They will shine long after I can sing her — sing what I
perceived through the distorted prisms of my vision.
I don’t know if I saw my mother
or did not see her. Day and night,
her charms will gleam in the brush or stream, will
reflect the mountain light in little
pieces of unreadable language.
~~~
The door to the past is a strange door. It swings open and things pass through it, but they pass in one direction only. No man can return across that threshold, though he can look down still and see the green light waver in the weeds.
          Loren Eiseley
A door opens in the wilderness.
People cross through it—bloused women families
 
Acquaintances friends all the ones I have loved
Sleep-walkers night-walkers each dazed and shorn—
 
Street aurous with ice, a snowfall scratched into
Moons—and everything I’d known—
 
Inside the bleak floating light of my lungs
In the capillaries of my eyes a blood
 
Glancing through the hatches—
If I said I would always be grateful
 
If I lied or touched with spite
If night is just a foamline of shadows
 
Though we were both lost—the door
Opening—the fear of being shown
 
Whole to the one who must love you still—
And stopped as if on a walk to say
 Look at that and what matters what really counts 
And I’ll tell you everything if you promise I promise
 
I stood at door and behind me heard
Snow-plows scrape against roads
 
At the center of night—unknown to yourself 
And the word I said out-loud to no one
 
That meant it was all to no purpose 
The word for the desire inside destruction 
 
For everything that can never be brought back—
Loose snow blown hard to each bank
 
And the common reel of those who
To avoid one extreme rush toward its opposite—
 
Snow blasted to piles—and never opened up to
Anything that could reach me until you reached me—
 
Which hours belonged to us
When was I unknowingly alone
 
Why did you always return to walk here a path
Behind my closed eyes shedding salt
 
Dry snowfall and sticks—still were you here
With me I might say The moon rose in the casement window 
 The red-haired boy across the street has learned to ride his bike
There are still picnics there are fountains
 
And the world I am leaving behind saysOne learns to see one learns to be kind—
 
I closed my eyes I closed my hands
I shut down the fields in my arms
 
The cattle on the plains veins ditches
Blue ravines a gray bird
 
Sailing through a poplar brake kids
Throwing snow I closed the last swinging juncos
 
Sheep wool caught on barbed wire I closed
Fumes and clear patches of sky I seized
 
The river the town I shut down
The hard muscles of sleep farmlands
 
Warming under midnight salt-lights scruff-pines
On the ridge animals scattering across slopes I closed
 
The smooth bone of evening a storm
On the hills white and noiseless spindled
 
Prairies where I was born I shut I seized
The clouds I closed in anger—fervor—ardor
 
~~~
I
Oh chimes set high on the sunny tower   
    Ring on, ring on unendingly,
Make all the hours a single hour,   
For when the dusk begins to flower,   
    The man I love will come to me! ...
But no, go slowly as you will,
    I should not bid you hasten so,   
For while I wait for love to come,   
Some other girl is standing dumb,
    Fearing her love will go.
       II
Oh white steam over the roofs, blow high!   
    Oh chimes in the tower ring clear and free!   
Oh sun awake in the covered sky,
    For the man I love, loves me! ...
Oh drifting steam disperse and die,
    Oh tower stand shrouded toward the south,—
Fate heard afar my happy cry,
    And laid her finger on my mouth.
       III
The dusk was blue with blowing mist,   
    The lights were spangles in a veil,   
And from the clamor far below
    Floated faint music like a wail.
It voiced what I shall never speak,
    My heart was breaking all night long,
But when the dawn was hard and gray,   
    My tears distilled into a song.
       IV
I said, “I have shut my heart   
    As one shuts an open door,
That Love may starve therein   
    And trouble me no more.”
But over the roofs there came
    The wet new wind of May,
And a tune blew up from the curb
    Where the street-pianos play.
My room was white with the sun   
    And Love cried out to me,
“I am strong, I will break your heart   
    Unless you set me free.”
~~~
                                                 (for Daniel, because                                                  
                                                 the Catacombs) 



You’re leaving Las Vegas, except
In German. Point. Point. Point.
Gave it out, beautiful gentilhommeComme vous êtes, toujours,
Unforgettable, circa 2008 how
You made me cum like that -
She got so mad in the bed - the
Hotel bathroom floor,
The bathtub, the apartment where
I was the crying queen
 
Those o’s still unforgettable
And now Paris. I cried today OW!
Your Antarctica cold last
Night. You told me they fucked
You up / I told you he broke
My heart and OW! Freeze
Dried my bandaid right off.
And then the glasses shopping
Memories today yada yada
Wasn’t about the cum shot
Where or if, was about the
Islands and how you said
in the langue d’enemie
No less: “DON’T TOUCH”
 
Don’t Touch!? We just …
They fucked you up all right.
You give so clearly but have iced
Out all the incoming gifts. WELL
PING my darling Walden island.
I can’t take that kind of cold.I’m leaving Las Vegas.
Just a moon in Taurus trying
To sing the sweet and
It’s not a great user experience
 
But I just want you to know
How unforgettable you are
 
 
When the candles call to Hera
I hope they melt your
I hope a goddess or many
Wash that loneliness away
And when I see you again (in 15 years)
There’s only joy and more
 
I prefer you laughing to tears
The good way. Drink us when
We’re done. Well, I guess I did
Almost kill you with a
Razor shave once so it
Seems silly to say I’m sorry I
Lost the phantom thread.
Maybe everything’s a ridiculous
never-ending non-planet
Tho, u did kiss me like unicorns
Exist and bond our skin
Like the organ it deserves to be
Known as
 
 
To know how unforgettable
you are because there
lies the bridge to the
Mainland. & baby, you
Deserve it all.
 
~~~
I do kind gestures. Remove my appendix.
I put my ear to a flat shell and—nothing.
I play the lottery ironically. Get married.
Have a smear test. I put my ear to the beak
of a dead bird—nothing. I grow wisdom
teeth. Jog. I pick up a toddler’s telephone,
Hello?—No answer. I change a light bulb
on my own. Organize a large party. Hire
a clown. Attend a four-day stonewalling
course. Have a baby. Stop eating Coco Pops.
I put my ear right up to the slack and gaping
bonnet of a daffodil—. Get divorced. Floss.
Describe a younger person’s music taste as
“just noise.” Enjoy perusing a garden center.
Sit in a pub without drinking. I stand at the
lip of a pouting valley—speak to me!
My echo plagiarizes. I land a real love plus
two real cats. I never meet the talking bird
again. Or the yawning hole. The panther
of purple wisps who prowls inside the air.
I change nappies. Donate my eggs. Learn
a profound lesson about sacrifice. Brunch.
No singing floorboards. No vents leaking
scentless instructions. My mission is over.
The world has zipped up her second mouth.
~~~
I have studied the tight curls on the back of your neck   
moving away from me
beyond anger or failure
your face in the evening schools of longing
through mornings of wish and ripen
we were always saying goodbye
in the blood in the bone over coffee
before dashing for elevators going
in opposite directions
without goodbyes.
Do not remember me as a bridge nor a roof   
as the maker of legends
nor as a trap
door to that world
where black and white clericals
hang on the edge of beauty in five oclock elevators   
twitching their shoulders to avoid other flesh   
and now
there is someone to speak for them   
moving away from me into tomorrows   
morning of wish and ripen
your goodbye is a promise of lightning   
in the last angels hand
unwelcome and warning
the sands have run out against us   
we were rewarded by journeys
away from each other
into desire
into mornings alone
where excuse and endurance mingle   
conceiving decision.
Do not remember me
as disaster
nor as the keeper of secrets
I am a fellow rider in the cattle cars
watching
you move slowly out of my bed   
saying we cannot waste time
only ourselves.
~~~
Once again you’ve fallen for the lure of his deferral, his quick eyes’ brightness slinking from the pantry of the righteous. Nothing half so sleek as self-licked fur. Not that he forgot your boots, or left A single high-aimed compliment unturned. He’ll double back, affect to be concerned when he’s the secret reason you’re bereft, embracing you with his Houdini hold, repeating chewed-off bits of what you say so he seems loyal, you the turncoat jay. You’d think by now you’d learn to be consoled to know the soul he sold’s not yours but his, though where yours was a hollow feeling is.
~~~
I want to spend a lot but not all of my years with you.
We’ll talk about kids
                              but make plans to travel.
I will remember your eyes
                              as green when they were gray.
Our dogs will be named For Now and Mostly.
               Sex will be good but next door’s will sound better.
There will be small things.
I will pick up your damp towel from the bed,
                                                            and then I won’t.
I won’t be as hot as I was
                              when I wasn’t yours
and your hairline now so
               untrustworthy.
When we pull up alongside a cattle car
                              and hear the frightened lows,
                              I will silently judge you
                              for not immediately renouncing meat.
You will bring me wine
                              and notice how much I drink.
                                              The garden you plant and I plant
                              is tunneled through by voles,
                                                             the vowels
                                                             we speak aren’t vows,
               but there’s something
                              holding me here, for now,
               like your eyes, which I suppose
                                                             are brown, after all.
~~~
when it pushes shadow from the trees
and presses it from their needles outside the Dye House
and the bus is dark inside     when it picks apart the lawn
and you are here
will you soften me?      for the sun
will you deflect it?
I am blinking in the atrium    the library
I don’t know if you have a room for me
or where on me you can lie down
 
but I want my anger easily exhausted
the way fact takes the rug from an argument
we both go on the floor
I do feel your shade
your wavy boughs   you dream
you are leaving me
I would become an ordinary person if you did
but you are awake   and I am ordinary anyway
and it pushes through me
 
  
~~~
Think not this paper comes with vain pretenseTo move your pity, or to mourn th’ offense.Too well I know that hard obdurate heart;No softening mercy there will take my part,Nor can a woman’s arguments prevail,When even your patron’s wise example fails.But this last privilege I still retain;Th’ oppressed and injured always may complain.
  Too, too severely laws of honor bindThe weak submissive sex of womankind.If sighs have gained or force compelled our hand,Deceived by art, or urged by stern command,Whatever motive binds the fatal tie,The judging world expects our constancy.
  Just heaven! (for sure in heaven does justice reign,Though tricks below that sacred name profane)To you appealing I submit my cause.Nor fear a judgment from impartial laws.All bargains but conditional are made;The purchase void, the creditor unpaid;Defrauded servants are from service free;A wounded slave regains his liberty.For wives ill used no remedy remains,To daily racks condemned, and to eternal chains.
  From whence is this unjust distinction grown?Are we not formed with passions like your own?Nature with equal fire our souls endued,Our minds as haughty, and as warm our blood;O’er the wide world your pleasures you pursue,The change is justified by something new;But we must sigh in silence—and be true.Our sex’s weakness you expose and blame(Of every prattling fop the common theme),Yet from this weakness you suppose is dueSublimer virtue than your Cato knew.Had heaven designed us trials so severe,It would have formed our tempers then to bear.
  And I have borne (oh what have I not borne!)The pang of jealousy, the insults of scorn.Wearied at length, I from your sight remove,And place my future hopes in secret love.In the gay bloom of glowing youth retired,I quit the woman’s joy to be admired,With that small pension your hard heart allows,Renounce your fortune, and release your vows.To custom (though unjust) so much is due;I hide my frailty from the public view.My conscience clear, yet sensible of shame,My life I hazard, to preserve my fame.And I prefer this low inglorious stateTo vile dependence on the thing I hate—But you pursue me to this last retreat.Dragged into light, my tender crime is shownAnd every circumstance of fondness known.Beneath the shelter of the law you stand,And urge my ruin with a cruel hand,While to my fault thus rigidly severe,Tamely submissive to the man you fear.
  This wretched outcast, this abandoned wife,Has yet this joy to sweeten shameful life:By your mean conduct, infamously loose,You are at once my accuser and excuse.Let me be damned by the censorious prude(Stupidly dull, or spiritually lewd),My hapless case will surely pity findFrom every just and reasonable mind.When to the final sentence I submit,The lips condemn me, but their souls aquit.
  No more my husband, to your pleasures go,The sweets of your recovered freedom know.Go: court the brittle friendship of the great,Smile at his board, or at his levee wait;And when dismissed, to madam’s toilet fly,More than her chambermaids, or glasses, lie,Tell her how young she looks, how heavenly fair,Admire the lilies and the roses there.Your high ambition may be gratified,Some cousin of her own be made your bride,And you the father of a glorious raceEndowed with Ch——l’s strength and Low——r’s face.
~~~
My monkey-wrench man is my sweet patootie;
the lover of my life, my youth and age.
My heart belongs to him and to him only;
the children of my flesh are his and bear his rage
Now grown to years advancing through the dozens
the honeyed kiss, the lips of wine and fire
fade blissfully into the distant years of yonder
but all my days of Happiness and wonder
are cradled in his arms and eyes entire.
They carry us under the waters of the world
out past the starposts of a distant planet
And creeping through the seaweed of the ocean
they tangle us with ropes and yarn of memories
where we have been together, you and I.
~~~
Love leave to urge, thou know’st thou hast the hand;    ’T’is cowardise, to strive wher none resist:    Pray thee leave off, I yeeld unto thy band;    Doe nott thus, still, in thine owne powre persist,Beehold I yeeld: lett forces bee dismist;    I ame thy subject, conquer’d, bound to stand,    Never thy foe, butt did thy claime assist    Seeking thy due of those who did withstand;Butt now, itt seemes, thou would’st I should thee love;    I doe confess, t’was thy will made mee chuse;    And thy faire showes made mee a lover prove    When I my freedome did, for paine refuse.Yett this Sir God, your boyship I dispise;Your charmes I obay, butt love nott want of eyes.
~~~
“The experience of truth is indispensible
for the experience of beauty and the sense
of beauty is guided by a leap in the dark.”
Arthur Koestler



I.
Stoplights edged the licorice street with ribbon,
neon embroidering wet sidewalks. She turned
into the driveway and leaped in the dark. A blackbird
perched on the bouncing twig of a maple, heard
her whisper, “Stranger, lover, the lost days are over.
While I walk from car to door, something inward opens
like four o’clocks in rain. Earth, cold from autumn,
pulls me. I can’t breathe the same
with dirt for marrow and mist for skin,
blurring my vision, my vision’s separate self.
I stand drunk in this glitter, under the sky’s grey shelter.
The city maple, not half so bitter, hurls itself
in two directions, until both tips darken and disappear,
as I darken my reflection in the smoking mirror
of my home. How faint the sound of dry leaves,
like the clattering keys of another morning, another world.”
                                       II.
She looked out the window at some inward greying door.
The maple held her glance, made ground fog from her cigarette.
Beyond uneven stairs, children screamed,
gunned each other down. Then she sealed her nimble dreams
with water from a murky bay. “For him I map
this galaxy of dust that turns without an answer.
When it rains, I remember his face in the corridor
of a past apartment and trace the anguish around his mouth,
his wrinkled forehead, unguarded eyes, the foreign fruit
of an intricate sadness. With the grace that remains,
I catch a glint around a door I cannot enter.
The clock echoes in dishtowels; I search love’s center
and bang pans against the rubble of my day, the lucid
grandeur of wet ground, the strangeness of a fatal sun
that makes us mark on the margin of our loss,
trust in the gossamer of touch, trust in the late-plowed field.”
                                       III.
When the sun opened clouds and walked into her mongrel soul,
she chopped celery into rocky remnants of the sea,
and heard fat sing up bread, a better dying.
The magnet in each seed of the green pepper kept her flying,
floating toward memories that throb like clustered stars:
the dark water laughter of ducks, a tangle of November oaks,
toward sudden music on a wheel of brilliant dust
where like a moon she must leap back and forth
from emptiness. “I remember the moon shimmering
loss and discovery along a water edge, and skirting
a slice of carrot, I welcome eternity in that sad eye of autumn.
Rare and real, I dance while vegetables sing in pairs.
I hug my death, my chorus of years, and search
and stretch and leap, for I will be apprentice to the blood
in spite of the mood of a world
that keeps rusting, rusting the wild throats of birds.”
                                       IV.
In lamplight she saw the smoke of another’s dream:
her daughter walk woods where snow weighs down pine,
her son cry on a bridge that ends in deep-rooted dark,
her man, stalled on a lonely road, realize his torque
was alcohol and hatred. “Hungry for silence, I listen
to wind, to the sound of water running down mountain,
my own raw breath. Between the sounds, a seaborn god
plays his reed in the caverns of my being.
I wear his amethyst, let go my dreams: Millars, Lacewings,
and Junebugs scatter, widen and batter the dark,
brightening this loud dust with the fever of their eyes.
Oh crazy itch that grabs us beyond loss
and lets us forgive, so that we can answer birds and deer,
lightning and rain, shadow and hurricane.
Truth waits in the creek, cutting the winter brown hills.
It sings with needles of ice, sings because of its scar.”
~~~
I was so thirsty, you cracked
an egg into my mouth. I ate it
& thanked you. We were so
rich then. I imagined the moon,
a being I’d never seen, in every nail
you’d use to tack the tarp
over our heads. I confused
hens clucking for the ringing
of the phone you’d never
let me answer. With a spatula
to my ear, I’d pretend to be
a woman on TV & say:¿Bueno? Your anger
was the gun you kept by the door,
my fear, the knife I used to chop
onions. One night you confused
the sound of a snake rattling
for rain. The snake opened
its jaw & its fangs were the color
of mud. You reached for my thighs
just before you died & I couldn’t
face you. Once you stopped
breathing I rubbed your beard
between my hands
& played the most beautiful
cumbia. We danced
for the first time since our wedding.
~~~
“Being so caught up
  So mastered.”
                                       —Yeats



I was too shy to say anything but Your poems are so beautiful.
What kinds of things, feelings, or ideas inspire you,
I mean, outside the raw experiences of your life?
He turned a strange crosshatched color
as if he stood in a clouded painting, and said, Thanks,
but no other phenomena intrude upon my starlit mind.
 
I see you are wondering what this is all about. Don’t mind
me, I’m talking to myself again. Yes, poetry is nice and often beautiful,
yet it doesn’t beget much attention, money, or even a simple thanks
for placing the best words in the best order. That’s when I forget all about your
incessant demands, and the restless subject leaps the stream in Technicolor—
until the Remembrancer appears and says, Stop this wasteful life.
 Doctor, lawyer, thief. These fancies of yours could cost a life
or worse, two. Meanwhile, he perceives my gifted body upholding my mind
as I’m explaining my stuff on the Unicorn Tapestries, cheeks starting to color,
feathers ruffling, quiet shudders. He shrugs, Your content sounds too beautiful
but I’d like to read it sometime. Okay. He says all the right things, like I love you
Hyacinth Girl. Things get interesting until the sudden blow: Thanks
 
For the memories. What I’ll think seeing his new work in The New Yorker is Thanks
for nothing, asshole, as he drops me for that prolific pastoral life
with his wife upstate. The more I think about it, it all depends upon your
phantom attention. Surely a world embroiders itself in one’s mind
at any moment, words resounding, ardent present clarifyingly beautiful
And beautifully truthful. You know? Here I should put in a lapis color
 
Or a murky midnight blue. Or have the crowd stagger by in a riot of color
pinning down the helpless beast with spears and ritualistic thanks
to their gods. What one really wants to get at is the real, the eternally beautiful
like The White Album or something. That’s what makes one perilous life
worth living. All the brute indifference, humiliation, and failure can put one in the   
             mind
to give up, freak out, kill somebody, heart battered, so mastered. Oh you
 
Wherever I go, on the subway, in my cubicle, at play, in sleep, it’s always you
of the air, overpowering my senses like a Dutch master in one pure color,
its fiction at full speed, walls breaking, a clarity panorama for the mind
hunting for meaning and finding it at last! Now look at all the work I did, and not
            one thanks
Not even flowers. Off you rush to watch him accept another award in that life
We can only dream of. From where you sit it all seems so beautiful
 
And I finally understand you. For that I can’t express enough thanks
As the subject is the best color for me in the difficulty of this lonely life.
It’s always caught up in my mind, what could be more beautiful.
~~~
While the Doormat asks neurotic questions about his ex,
the Dream Girl looks at her watch if her man brings up the ex,
and if the man ever says, “Everyone was in love with my ex,”
a Dream Girl won’t ask for a photo, but if a photo of the ex
is provided, the Dream Girl won’t demean the appearance of the ex
because her man will likely rush to his ex’s
defense. The lesson is that when a man considers his ex
a prize looks have little to do with it, for when a woman acts
like a prize a man can forget he’s with a battle axe.
What should you say when he asks questions about your ex?
Remember you’re a prize, so you needn’t report that your ex
stole appliances or defaulted on child support or that your ex
has a Mafioso brother doing time for racketeering or that your ex
is “still stalking you” — because your man will not find these ex
stories charming, if he’s classy, so what you say about your ex
is simply, “We wanted different things,” or, alternatively, “My ex
and I went separate ways.” It’s none of his business: your ex
and all the vicissitudes of your past, like the jewelry your ex
gave you which you pawned, or your violent fantasies about your ex
because inquiring minds don’t need to know. Did you know that exes
are a common conversation topic among men: “You remember my ex,
the one who snapped ... ?” they might say, referring to the “terrible” ex
who was “possessed by demons,” thus causing the inevitable ex-
tramarital affair? Of course he never had anything to do with his ex’s
transformation, he was a perfect angel, but lo and behold, the ex-
orcist was suddenly required! Women believe these narratives and ex-
coriate themselves if they’re Doormats, but love is beset by variables,
and Dream Girls must take control in this world of unknowns.
~~~
(for E)




               I stop my hand midair.
 
               If I touch her there everything about me will be true.
               The New World discovered without pick or ax.
 
               I will be what Brenda Jones was stoned for in 1969.
               I saw it as a girl but didn’t know I was taking in myself.
 
               My hand remembers, treading the watery room,
               just behind the rose-veiled eyes of memory.
 
Alone in the yard tucked beneath the hood of her car,
lucky clover all about her feet, green tea-sweet necklace
for her mud-pie crusty work boots.
 
She fends off their spit & words with silent two-handed
twists & turns of her socket wrench. A hurl of sticks &
stones and only me to whisper for her, from sidewalk far,
 break my bones. A grown woman in grease-pocket overalls
inside her own sexy transmission despite the crowding of
hurled red hots. Beneath the hood of her candy-apple Camaro: 
souped, shiny, low to the ground. 
               The stars over the Atlantic are dangling
               salt crystals. The room at the Seashell Inn is
               $20 a night; special winter off-season rate.
               No one else here but us and the night clerk,
               five floors below, alone with his cherished
               stack of Spiderman. My lips are red snails
               in a primal search for every constellation
               hiding in the sky of your body. My hand
               waits for permission, for my life to agree
               to be changed, forever. Can Captain Night
               Clerk hear my fingers tambourining you
               there on the moon? Won’t he soon climb
               the stairs and bam! on the hood of this car?
               You are a woman with film reels for eyes.
               Years of long talking have brought us to the
               land of the body. Our skin is one endless
               prayer bead of brown. If my hand ever lands,
               I will fly past dreaming Australian Aborigines.
               The old claw hammer and monkey wrench
               that flew at Brenda Jones will fly across the
               yard of ocean at me. A grease rag will be
               thrust into my painter’s pants against my
               will. I will never be able to wash or peel
               any of this away. Before the night is over
               someone I do not know will want the keys
               to my ’55 silver Thunderbird. He will chase
               me down the street. A gaggle of spooked
               hens will fly up in my grandmother’s yard,
               never to lay another egg, just as I am jump-
               ed, kneed, pulled finally to the high ground
               of sweet clover.
~~~
Remember when you love, from that same hour Your peace you put into your lover’s power; From that same hour from him you laws receive, And as he shall ordain, you joy, or grieve, Hope, fear, laugh, weep; Reason aloof does stand, Disabled both to act, and to command. Oh cruel fetters! rather wish to feel On your soft limbs, the galling weight of steel; Rather to bloody wounds oppose your breast. No ill, by which the body can be pressed You will so sensible a torment find As shackles on your captived mind. The mind from heaven its high descent did draw, And brooks uneasily any other law Than what from Reason dictated shall be. Reason, a kind of innate deity, Which only can adapt to ev’ry soul A yoke so fit and light, that the control All liberty excels; so sweet a sway, The same ’tis to be happy, and obey; Commands so wise, and with rewards so dressed, That the according soul replies “I’m blessed.” 
~~~
If my own voice falters, tell them hubris was my way of adoring you.
The hollow of the hulk of you, so feverish in life, cut open,
Reveals ten thousand rags of music in your thoracic cavity.
The hands are received bagged and examination reveals no injury.
Winter then, the body is cold to the touch, unplunderable,
                                 Kept in its drawer of old-world harrowing.
Teeth in fair repair. Will you be buried where; nowhere.
Your mouth a globe of gauze and glossolalia.
And opening, most delft of blue,
                                                                  Your heart was a mess—
A mob of hoofprints where the skittish colts first learned to stand,
Catching on to their agility, a shock of freedom, wild-maned.
The eyes have hazel irides and the conjunctivae are pale,
With hemorrhaging. One lung, smaller, congested with rose smoke.
The other, filled with a swarm of massive sentimentia.
                                                                   I adore you more. I know
The wingspan of your voice, whole gorgeous flock of harriers,
Cannot be taken down. You would like it now, this snow, this hour.
                                 Your visitation here tonight not altogether unexpected.
The night-laborers, immigrants all, assemble here, aching for to speaking,
                                                                                        Longing for to work.
~~~
These lovers’ inklings which our loves enmesh,   
Lost to the cunning and dimensional eye,   
Though tenemented in the selves we see,   
Not more perforce than azure to the sky,   
Were necromancy-juggled to the flesh,   
And startled from no daylight you or me.
For trance and silvemess those moons commend,   
Which blanch the warm life silver-pale; or look   
What ghostly portent mist distorts from slight   
Clay shapes; the willows that the waters took   
Liquid and brightened in the waters bend,   
And we, in love’s reflex, seemed loved of right.
Then no more think to net forthwith love’s thing,   
But cast for it by spirit sleight-of-hand;
Then only in the slant glass contemplate,   
Where lineament outstripping line is scanned,   
Then on the perplexed text leave pondering,   
Love’s proverb is set down transliterate.
~~~
Lightning hits the roof,
shoves the knife, darkness,
deep in the walls.
They bleed light all over us
and your face, the fan, folds up,
so I won’t see how afraid
to be with me you are.
We don’t mix, even in bed,
where we keep ending up.
There’s no need to hide it:
you’re snow, I’m coal,
I’ve got the scars to prove it.
But open your mouth,
I’ll give you a taste of black
you won’t forget.
For a while, I’ll let it make you strong,
make your heart lion,
then I’ll take it back.
~~~
The same to me are sombre days and gay.       Though joyous dawns the rosy morn, and bright, Because my dearest love is gone away       Within my heart is melancholy night. My heart beats low in loneliness, despite       That riotous Summer holds the earth in sway. In cerements my spirit is bedight;       The same to me are sombre days and gay. Though breezes in the rippling grasses play,       And waves dash high and far in glorious might, I thrill no longer to the sparkling day,       Though joyous dawns the rosy morn, and bright. Ungraceful seems to me the swallow's flight;       As well might Heaven's blue be sullen gray; My soul discerns no beauty in their sight       Because my dearest love is gone away. Let roses fling afar their crimson spray,       And virgin daisies splash the fields with white, Let bloom the poppy hotly as it may,       Within my heart is melancholy night. And this, oh love, my pitiable plight       Whenever from my circling arms you stray; This little world of mine has lost its light ...       I hope to God, my dear, that you can say                                        The same to me. 
~~~
An hour inland from Bangor, Maine,
over rolling hills, in an oval pasture
surrounded by giant conifers,
the forest floor bejeweled
with ruby-studded mushrooms,
I watch the sheep sing,
if bleating could be called a song.
Maybe someone in a grove long ago
saw a man attached to a beast
of burden and so the concept
of the satyr was born. Memory is
the past reversed. I once
went out with a sailor, a Spaniard,
from Andalucía. We met at sea
where I worked the roulette wheel
in the ship’s casino. His legs
were slightly bowed, his voice
gruff and torn, and when he came
the sound seemed to climb up
not from his throat but from his feet
smelling of earth and sea and grief—
a deep song Lorca called duende.
It wasn’t pretty. His blue and red
and purple briefs soaking in a bucket
by the cabin door. He told me once
when he was a boy his grandmother
had caught him trying to fuck
a chicken. The poor chicken,
he laughed, his saddle-worn Andalucían
laugh, feathers flying everywhere, his
grandmother screaming. And what
to call those half-human, half-chicken
kinds of days: scratching and clawing
at the earth, bathed in dust,
trying not to think about the simmering
anise, peppercorn, and broth.
When I visited him, he met me
at the airport. Then the long train 
ride south through field after field
of sunflowers. Por la tarde families
paraded, por la noche, only men
and boys and extranjeras—foreign women—
out past sunset. In an empty disco six
or seven guys danced, throwing themselves
around madly, slamming into each
other to Blondie’s “Heart of Glass.”
Franco had died a few years back.
From my window that night, a full moon,
shadows of the town square, the boarded-up
cathedral, a cat in heat, the smell
of blood oranges. In the morning
his grandmother, all in black,
asleep stooped in a chair outside
my door. Nearby the ruins of an ancient
Roman temple, goats on hind legs
eating the pale green leaves from olive trees.
~~~
for John



At a party I spy a handsome psychiatrist,
And wish, as we all do, to get her advice for free.
Doctor, I’ll say, I’m supposed to be a poet.
All life’s awfulness has been grist to me.
We learn that happiness is a Chinese meal,
While sorrow is a nourishment forever.
My new environment is California Dreamer.
I’m fearful I’m forgetting how to brood.
And, Doctor, another thing has got me worried:
I’m not drinking as much as I should . . .
 
At home, I want to write a happy poem
On love, or a love poem of happiness.
But they won’t do, the tensions of every day,
The rub, the minor abrasions of any two
Who share one space. Ah, there’s no substitute for tragedy!
But in this chapter, tragedy belongs
To that other life, the old life before us.
Here is my aphorism of the day:
Happy people are monogamous.
Even in California. So how does the poem play
 
Without the paraphernalia of betrayal and loss?
I don’t have a jealous eye or fear
And neither do you. In truth, I’m fond
Of your ex-mate, whom I name “my wife-in-law.”
My former husband, that old disaster, is now just funny,
So laugh we do, in what Cyril Connolly
Has called the endless, nocturnal conversation
Of marriage. Which may be the best part.
Darling, must I love you in light verse
Without the tribute of profoundest art?
 
Of course it won’t last. You will break my heart
Or I yours, by dying. I could weep over that.
But now it seems forced, here in these heaven hills,
The mourning doves mourning, the squirrels mating,
My old cat warm in my lap, here on our terrace
As from below comes a musical cursing
As you mend my favorite plate. Later of course
I could pick a fight; there is always material in that.
But we don’t come from fighting people, those
Who scream out red-hot iambs in their hate.
 
No, love, the heavy poem will have to come
From temps perdu, fertile with pain, or perhaps
Detonated by terrors far beyond this place
Where the world rends itself, and its tainted waters
Rise in the east to erode our safety here.
Much as I want to gather a lifetime thrift
And craft, my cunning skills tied in a knot for you,
There is only this useless happiness as gift.﻿
~~~
Left a hole on fire agony or was it the sun
on the banks and near duets?
Eagles with the white wine of the sun
clink and spill, tall
grass over head and heels
. . . Space of hell: shy, inscribed already
but alone— I think I can be that
again, a new hole in the ongoing flute.
In a leap, the country glows— to hone
the fate that wonder exacts,
to go netted through that much,
so heavy as paperweights angels land
square on chaparral nerves.
And since names must give in spades,
out of sorts like these, your reactions
may swell great fountain lips—
a promise that a wish will purge
or pennies caravan the safe
return hearts cross.
~~~
If I could be anyting
I would be a rich white girl
and I am almost halfway there
I straightened my hair before it rained
Now all I can do is pray
I don't mean that figuratively
I'm living in this logocentrism
Where did I get these Spanish thighs
I was crying in the food court
because I'm afraid
of the spiritual anorexia that I crave
I wrote out a prayer in reportorial style
like a good Protestant
Obsessed with achieving
the androgyny of my time
I cut when my boyfriend said
I had the figure
of an average Hispanic girl
so what was I so upset about
I decided to try liposuction at home
So much splendor is owed
to dysmorphia and a fucked perspective
like those Gothic spires poking the heavens
that someone just thought up like
can we tap this broomstick
on ethereal marble floors or what
can we really do
 
~~~
Flour on the floor makes my sandals 
slip and I tumble into your arms. 
Too hot to bake this morning but
blueberries begged me to fold them
into moist muffins. Sticks of rhubarb 
plotted a whole pie. The windows
are blown open and a thickfruit tang
sneaks through the wire screen
and into the home of the scowly lady
who lives next door. Yesterday, a man 
in the city was rescued from his apartment
which was filled with a thousand rats. 
Something about being angry because
his pet python refused to eat. He let the bloom 
of fur rise, rise over the little gnarly blue rug, 
over the coffee table, the kitchen countertops
and pip through each cabinet, snip
at the stumpy bags of sugar,
the cylinders of salt. Our kitchen is a riot
of pots, wooden spoons, melted butter. 
So be it. Maybe all this baking will quiet
the angry voices next door, if only
for a brief whiff. I want our summers
to always be like this—a kitchen wrecked
with love, a table overflowing with baked goods
warming the already warm air. After all the pots
are stacked, the goodies cooled, and all the counters
wiped clean—let us never be rescued from this mess. 
~~~
Love peruse me, seeke, and findeHow each corner of my minde            Is a twine            Woven to shine.Not a Webb ill made, foule fram’d,Bastard not by Father nam’d,            Such in me            Cannot bee.Deare behold me, you shall seeFaith the Hive, and love the Bee,            Which doe bring.            Gaine and sting.Pray desect me, sinewes, vaines,Hold, and loves life in those gaines;            Lying bare            To despaire,When you thus anotamiseAll my body, my heart prise;            Being true            Just to you.Close the Truncke, embalme the Chest,Where your power still shall rest,            Joy entombe,            Loves just doome.
~~~
Before the war leaned in and blew out
the candles, there were many long days
where lovers called themselves lovers
and a house was a dream but also
four walls, a roof. A father called
to his daughter to see the monarch butterflies,
pausing in their migration to fan the goldenrod,
a tiger in each coy disclosure.
A young man reached for a blackberry
and found draped on a branch a green snake
the color of matcha. A snake the color of matcha
sighed in the sun. People drove in cars.
There were jobs and someone had to work
every morning. A man quit his job
but it was no tragedy. He didn’t like the work.
Another man slid in and found it comfortable
enough, and just as easily slid in beside
the man’s wife and into the everyday rhythms
of his life and that was no tragedy either.
After rains, a ring of mushrooms would delicately
crack the earth. Spanish moss harbored red mites.
The sky wasn’t interesting. No one looked up.
~~~
In art, politics, school, church, business, love
 or marriage—in a piece of work or in a career—
strongly spent is synonymous with kept. 
                                                              —Robert Frost



She taught me the names of flowers: calendula, ranunculus, Iceland
poppy. And the medicinal uses of herbs: Fenugreek opens up a
stuffy head; goldenseal lubricates the cracked mucous membranes.
Over a circa 1820 American dropleaf table, she told me asparagus
was the broom of the kidneys. I hadn't understood at first and
thought she'd used a German word I pictured as brüm and not as the
little stalks standing on their heads, sweeping out the impurities. I
learned to make the perfect roux for soufflé and became her
efficient assistant in the kitchen—dicing and chopping, she once
told me, with unparalleled patience. Then one day she began to
accidentally break my Depression glassware, and I recalled how
she'd giggled when she told me that in two years of marriage she
had single-handedly decimated her husband's glass collection
dating from 1790 to 1810, including a rare wedding goblet. In the
doorway to the back porch she stated simply that my presence
made her feel strangled, it was nothing I was doing or could do. We
saw a therapist for six years, while my collection dwindled then
became memory. With unparalleled patience I jumped through
hoop after burning hoop, the therapist pointed out, but I heard that
as praise for my prowess and continued to balance Bauer plates on
my nose on command; hold growling tigers off with Windsor dining
room chairs; juggle career, job, hope, and nightly tempests with
unparalleled dexterity. I could reassemble anything: shattered pictures
of us crossing the street with canes in the future, my hand under her
elbow. My heart. But what I lacked, I can see now, was the ability
to dissemble. Finally, she brought home a Cuisinart food processor,
and I started hearing the minutes slicing away with ferocious velocity,
time doing its soft-shoe faster and faster like Fred Astaire on
amphetamines. Memories of flowers and herbs were sacrificed to
the angry god of its vortex. Your voice is like acid on my skin, she
said after twelve years, then grabbed her Cuisinart and left me
behind like so much history.
~~~
What if we got outside ourselves and there   
really was an outside out there, not just   
our insides turned inside out? What if there   
really were a you beyond me, not just   
the waves off my own fire, like those waves off   
the backyard grill you can see the next yard through,   
though not well -- just enough to know that off   
to the right belongs to someone else, not you.   
What if, when we said I love you, there were   
a you to love as there is a yard beyond   
to walk past the grill and get to? To endure   
the endless walk through the self, knowing through a bond   
that has no basis (for ourselves are all we know)   
is altruism: not giving, but coming to know   
someone is there through the wavy vision   
of the self's heat, love become a decision.
~~~
When last we parted, thou wert young and fair,
  How beautiful let fond remembrance say!
  Alas! since then old time has stolen awayFull thirty years, leaving my temples bare.—So has it perished like a thing of air,
  The dream of love and youth!— now both are grey
  Yet still remembering that delightful day,Though time with his cold touch has blanched my hair,
  Though I have suffered many years of painSince then, though I did never think to live
  To hear that voice or see those eyes again,I can a sad but cordial greeting give,And for thy welfare breathe as warm a prayer—As when I loved thee young and fair.
~~~
Whatever it may be, we may suppose it is not love, for love must leave its trace like contraband seized and displayed in rows; is not sufficient reason to erase the careful lives we have so far lived through— there is no call for us to undermine the walls we've built; no need to think anew of all the chains and choices that define us still. And yet for all our fine intent a single touch ignites the night and tries resolve past all resisting. What we meant before we mean again; fidelities have yet been known to shift and come undone and all good reasons fail us, one by one.
~~~
I
I can hear little clicks inside my dream.
Night drips its silver tap
down the back.
At 4 A.M. I wake. Thinking
of the man who
left in September.
His name was Law.
My face in the bathroom mirror
has white streaks down it.
I rinse the face and return to bed.
Tomorrow I am going to visit my mother.
SHE
She lives on a moor in the north.
She lives alone.
Spring opens like a blade there.
I travel all day on trains and bring a lot of books—
some for my mother, some for me
including The Collected Works Of Emily Brontë.
This is my favourite author.
Also my main fear, which I mean to confront.
Whenever I visit my mother
I feel I am turning into Emily Brontë,
my lonely life around me like a moor,
my ungainly body stumping over the mud flats with a look of transformation
that dies when I come in the kitchen door.
What meat is it, Emily, we need?
THREE
Three silent women at the kitchen table.
My mother’s kitchen is dark and small but out the window
there is the moor, paralyzed with ice.
It extends as far as the eye can see
over flat miles to a solid unlit white sky.
Mother and I are chewing lettuce carefully.
The kitchen wall clock emits a ragged low buzz that jumps
once a minute over the twelve.
I have Emily p. 216 propped open on the sugarbowl
but am covertly watching my mother.
A thousand questions hit my eyes from the inside.
My mother is studying her lettuce.
I turn to p. 217.
“In my flight through the kitchen I knocked over Hareton
who was hanging a litter of puppies
from a chairback in the doorway. . . .”
It is as if we have all been lowered into an atmosphere of glass.
Now and then a remark trails through the glass.
Taxes on the back lot. Not a good melon,
too early for melons.
Hairdresser in town found God, closes shop every Tuesday.
Mice in the teatowel drawer again.
Little pellets. Chew off
the corners of the napkins, if they knew
what paper napkins cost nowadays.
Rain tonight.
Rain tomorrow.
That volcano in the Philippines at it again. What’s her name
Anderson died no not Shirley
the opera singer. Negress.
Cancer.
Not eating your garnish, you don’t like pimento?
Out the window I can see dead leaves ticking over the flatland
and dregs of snow scarred by pine filth.
At the middle of the moor
where the ground goes down into a depression,
the ice has begun to unclench.
Black open water comes
curdling up like anger. My mother speaks suddenly.
That psychotherapy’s not doing you much good is it?
You aren’t getting over him.
My mother has a way of summing things up.
She never liked Law much
but she liked the idea of me having a man and getting on with life.
Well he’s a taker and you’re a giver I hope it works out,
was all she said after she met him.
Give and take were just words to me
at the time. I had not been in love before.
It was like a wheel rolling downhill.
But early this morning while mother slept
and I was downstairs reading the part in Wuthering Heights
where Heathcliff clings at the lattice in the storm sobbing
Come in! Come in! to the ghost of his heart’s darling,
I fell on my knees on the rug and sobbed too.
She knows how to hang puppies,
that Emily.
It isn’t like taking an aspirin you know, I answer feebly.
Dr. Haw says grief is a long process.
She frowns. What does it accomplish
all that raking up the past?
Oh—I spread my hands—
I prevail! I look her in the eye.
She grins. Yes you do.
WHACHER
Whacher,
Emily’s habitual spelling of this word,
has caused confusion.
For example
in the first line of the poem printed Tell me, whether, is it winter?
in the Shakespeare Head edition.
But whacher is what she wrote.
Whacher is what she was.
She whached God and humans and moor wind and open night.
She whached eyes, stars, inside, outside, actual weather.
She whached the bars of time, which broke.
She whached the poor core of the world,
wide open.
To be a whacher is not a choice.
There is nowhere to get away from it,
no ledge to climb up to—like a swimmer
who walks out of the water at sunset
shaking the drops off, it just flies open.
To be a whacher is not in itself sad or happy,
although she uses these words in her verse
as she uses the emotions of sexual union in her novel,
grazing with euphemism the work of whaching.
But it has no name.
It is transparent.
Sometimes she calls it Thou.
“Emily is in the parlour brushing the carpet,”
records Charlotte in 1828.
Unsociable even at home
and unable to meet the eyes of strangers when she ventured out,
Emily made her awkward way
across days and years whose bareness appalls her biographers.
This sad stunted life, says one.
Uninteresting, unremarkable, wracked by disappointment
and despair, says another.
She could have been a great navigator if she’d been male,
suggests a third. Meanwhile
Emily continued to brush into the carpet the question,
Why cast the world away.
For someone hooked up to Thou,
the world may have seemed a kind of half-finished sentence.
But in between the neighbour who recalls her
coming in from a walk on the moors
with her face “lit up by a divine light”
and the sister who tells us
Emily never made a friend in her life,
is a space where the little raw soul
slips through.
It goes skimming the deep keel like a storm petrel,
out of sight.
The little raw soul was caught by no one.
She didn’t have friends, children, sex, religion, marriage, success, a salary
or a fear of death. She worked
in total six months of her life (at a school in Halifax)
and died on the sofa at home at 2 P.M. on a winter afternoon
in her thirty-first year. She spent
most of the hours of her life brushing the carpet,
walking the moor
or whaching. She says
it gave her peace.
“All tight and right in which condition it is to be hoped we shall all be this   
    day 4 years,”
she wrote in her Diary Paper of 1837.
Yet her poetry from beginning to end is concerned with prisons,
vaults, cages, bars, curbs, bits, bolts, fetters,
locked windows, narrow frames, aching walls.
“Why all the fuss?” asks one critic.
“She wanted liberty. Well didn’t she have it?
A reasonably satisfactory homelife,
a most satisfactory dreamlife—why all this beating of wings?
What was this cage, invisible to us,
which she felt herself to be confined in?”
Well there are many ways of being held prisoner,
I am thinking as I stride over the moor.
As a rule after lunch mother has a nap
and I go out to walk.
The bare blue trees and bleached wooden sky of April
carve into me with knives of light.
Something inside it reminds me of childhood—
it is the light of the stalled time after lunch
when clocks tick
and hearts shut
and fathers leave to go back to work
and mothers stand at the kitchen sink pondering
something they never tell.
You remember too much,
my mother said to me recently.
Why hold onto all that? And I said,
Where can I put it down?
She shifted to a question about airports.
Crops of ice are changing to mud all around me
as I push on across the moor
warmed by drifts from the pale blue sun.
On the edge of the moor our pines
dip and coast in breezes
from somewhere else.
Perhaps the hardest thing about losing a lover is
to watch the year repeat its days.
It is as if I could dip my hand down
into time and scoop up
blue and green lozenges of April heat
a year ago in another country.
I can feel that other day running underneath this one
like an old videotape—here we go fast around the last corner
up the hill to his house, shadows
of limes and roses blowing in the car window
and music spraying from the radio and him
singing and touching my left hand to his lips.
Law lived in a high blue room from which he could see the sea.
Time in its transparent loops as it passes beneath me now
still carries the sound of the telephone in that room
and traffic far off and doves under the window
chuckling coolly and his voice saying,
You beauty. I can feel that beauty’s
heart beating inside mine as she presses into his arms in the high blue room—
No, I say aloud. I force my arms down
through air which is suddenly cold and heavy as water
and the videotape jerks to a halt
like a glass slide under a drop of blood.
I stop and turn and stand into the wind,
which now plunges towards me over the moor.
When Law left I felt so bad I thought I would die.
This is not uncommon.
I took up the practice of meditation.
Each morning I sat on the floor in front of my sofa
and chanted bits of old Latin prayers.De profundis clamavi ad te Domine.
Each morning a vision came to me.
Gradually I understood that these were naked glimpses of my soul.
I called them Nudes.
Nude #1. Woman alone on a hill.
She stands into the wind.
It is a hard wind slanting from the north.
Long flaps and shreds of flesh rip off the woman’s body and lift
and blow away on the wind, leaving
an exposed column of nerve and blood and muscle
calling mutely through lipless mouth.
It pains me to record this,
I am not a melodramatic person.
But soul is “hewn in a wild workshop”
as Charlotte Brontë says of Wuthering Heights.
Charlotte’s preface to Wuthering Heights is a publicist’s masterpiece.
Like someone carefully not looking at a scorpion
crouched on the arm of the sofa Charlotte
talks firmly and calmly
about the other furniture of Emily’s workshop—about
the inexorable spirit (“stronger than a man, simpler than a child”),
the cruel illness (“pain no words can render”),
the autonomous end (“she sank rapidly, she made haste to leave us”)
and about Emily’s total subjection
to a creative project she could neither understand nor control,
and for which she deserves no more praise nor blame
than if she had opened her mouth
“to breathe lightning.” The scorpion is inching down
the arm of the sofa while Charlotte
continues to speak helpfully about lightning
and other weather we may expect to experience
when we enter Emily’s electrical atmosphere.
It is “a horror of great darkness” that awaits us there
but Emily is not responsible. Emily was in the grip.
“Having formed these beings she did not know what she had done,”
says Charlotte (of Heathcliff and Earnshaw and Catherine).
Well there are many ways of being held prisoner.
The scorpion takes a light spring and lands on our left knee
as Charlotte concludes, “On herself she had no pity.”
Pitiless too are the Heights, which Emily called Wuthering
because of their “bracing ventilation”
and “a north wind over the edge.”
Whaching a north wind grind the moor
that surrounded her father’s house on every side,
formed of a kind of rock called millstone grit,
taught Emily all she knew about love and its necessities—
an angry education that shapes the way her characters
use one another. “My love for Heathcliff,” says Catherine,
“resembles the eternal rocks beneath
a source of little visible delight, but necessary.”
Necessary? I notice the sun has dimmed
and the afternoon air sharpening.
I turn and start to recross the moor towards home.
What are the imperatives
that hold people like Catherine and Heathcliff
together and apart, like pores blown into hot rock
and then stranded out of reach
of one another when it hardens? What kind of necessity is that?
The last time I saw Law was a black night in September.
Autumn had begun,
my knees were cold inside my clothes.
A chill fragment of moon rose.
He stood in my living room and spoke
without looking at me. Not enough spin on it,
he said of our five years of love.
Inside my chest I felt my heart snap into two pieces
which floated apart. By now I was so cold
it was like burning. I put out my hand
to touch his. He moved back.
I don’t want to be sexual with you, he said. Everything gets crazy.
But now he was looking at me.
Yes, I said as I began to remove my clothes.
Everything gets crazy. When nude
I turned my back because he likes the back.
He moved onto me.
Everything I know about love and its necessities
I learned in that one moment
when I found myself
thrusting my little burning red backside like a baboon
at a man who no longer cherished me.
There was no area of my mind
not appalled by this action, no part of my body
that could have done otherwise.
But to talk of mind and body begs the question.
Soul is the place,
stretched like a surface of millstone grit between body and mind,
where such necessity grinds itself out.
Soul is what I kept watch on all that night.
Law stayed with me.
We lay on top of the covers as if it weren’t really a night of sleep and time,
caressing and singing to one another in our made-up language
like the children we used to be.
That was a night that centred Heaven and Hell,
as Emily would say. We tried to fuck
but he remained limp, although happy. I came
again and again, each time accumulating lucidity,
until at last I was floating high up near the ceiling looking down
on the two souls clasped there on the bed
with their mortal boundaries
visible around them like lines on a map.
I saw the lines harden.
He left in the morning.
It is very cold
walking into the long scraped April wind.
At this time of year there is no sunset
just some movements inside the light and then a sinking away.
KITCHEN
Kitchen is quiet as a bone when I come in.
No sound from the rest of the house.
I wait a moment
then open the fridge.
Brilliant as a spaceship it exhales cold confusion.
My mother lives alone and eats little but her fridge is always crammed.
After extracting the yogurt container
from beneath a wily arrangement of leftover blocks of Christmas cake
wrapped in foil and prescription medicine bottles
I close the fridge door. Bluish dusk
fills the room like a sea slid back.
I lean against the sink.
White foods taste best to me
and I prefer to eat alone. I don’t know why.
Once I heard girls singing a May Day song that went:
                                 Violante in the pantry
                                 Gnawing at a mutton bone
                                 How she gnawed it
                                 How she clawed it
                                 When she felt herself alone.
Girls are cruelest to themselves.
Someone like Emily Brontë,
who remained a girl all her life despite her body as a woman,
had cruelty drifted up in all the cracks of her like spring snow.
We can see her ridding herself of it at various times
with a gesture like she used to brush the carpet.
Reason with him and then whip him!
was her instruction (age six) to her father
regarding brother Branwell.
And when she was 14 and bitten by a rabid dog she strode (they say)
into the kitchen and taking red hot tongs from the back of the stove applied
them directly to her arm.
Cauterization of Heathcliff took longer.
More than thirty years in the time of the novel,
from the April evening when he runs out the back door of the kitchen
and vanishes over the moor
because he overheard half a sentence of Catherine’s
(“It would degrade me to marry Heathcliff”)
until the wild morning
when the servant finds him stark dead and grinning
on his rainsoaked bed upstairs in Wuthering Heights.
Heathcliff is a pain devil.
If he had stayed in the kitchen
long enough to hear the other half of Catherine’s sentence
(“so he will never know how I love him”)
Heathcliff would have been set free.
But Emily knew how to catch a devil.
She put into him in place of a soul
the constant cold departure of Catherine from his nervous system
every time he drew a breath or moved thought.
She broke all his moments in half,
with the kitchen door standing open.
I am not unfamiliar with this half-life.
But there is more to it than that.
Heathcliff’s sexual despair
arose out of no such experience in the life of Emily Brontë,
so far as we know. Her question,
which concerns the years of inner cruelty that can twist a person into a pain
    devil,
came to her in a kindly firelit kitchen
(“kichin” in Emily’s spelling) where she
and Charlotte and Anne peeled potatoes together
and made up stories with the old house dog Keeper at their feet.
There is a fragment
of a poem she wrote in 1839
(about six years before Wuthering Heights) that says:
                            That iron man was born like me
                            And he was once an ardent boy:
                            He must have felt in infancy
                            The glory of a summer sky.
Who is the iron man?
My mother’s voice cuts across me,
from the next room where she is lying on the sofa.
Is that you dear?
Yes Ma.
Why don’t you turn on a light in there?
Out the kitchen window I watch the steely April sun
jab its last cold yellow streaks
across a dirty silver sky.
Okay Ma. What’s for supper?
LIBERTY
Liberty means different things to different people.
I have never liked lying in bed in the morning.
Law did.
My mother does.
But as soon as the morning light hits my eyes I want to be out in it—
moving along the moor
into the first blue currents and cold navigation of everything awake.
I hear my mother in the next room turn and sigh and sink deeper.
I peel the stale cage of sheets off my legs
and I am free.
Out on the moor all is brilliant and hard after a night of frost.
The light plunges straight up from the ice to a blue hole at the top of the sky.
Frozen mud crunches underfoot. The sound
startles me back into the dream I was having
this morning when I awoke,
one of those nightlong sweet dreams of lying in Law’s
arms like a needle in water—it is a physical effort
to pull myself out of his white silk hands
as they slide down my dream hips—I
turn and face into the wind
and begin to run.
Goblins, devils and death stream behind me.
In the days and months after Law left
I felt as if the sky was torn off my life.
I had no home in goodness anymore.
To see the love between Law and me
turn into two animals gnawing and craving through one another
towards some other hunger was terrible.
Perhaps this is what people mean by original sin, I thought.
But what love could be prior to it?
What is prior?
What is love?
My questions were not original.
Nor did I answer them.
Mornings when I meditated
I was presented with a nude glimpse of my lone soul,
not the complex mysteries of love and hate.
But the Nudes are still as clear in my mind
as pieces of laundry that froze on the clothesline overnight.
There were in all thirteen of them.
Nude #2. Woman caught in a cage of thorns.
Big glistening brown thorns with black stains on them
where she twists this way and that way
unable to stand upright.
Nude #3. Woman with a single great thorn implanted in her forehead.
She grips it in both hands
endeavouring to wrench it out.
Nude #4. Woman on a blasted landscape
backlit in red like Hieronymus Bosch.
Covering her head and upper body is a hellish contraption
like the top half of a crab.
With arms crossed as if pulling off a sweater
she works hard at dislodging the crab.
It was about this time
I began telling Dr. Haw
about the Nudes. She said,
When you see these horrible images why do you stay with them?
Why keep watching? Why not
go away? I was amazed.
Go away where? I said.
This still seems to me a good question.
But by now the day is wide open and a strange young April light
is filling the moor with gold milk.
I have reached the middle
where the ground goes down into a depression and fills with swampy water.
It is frozen.
A solid black pane of moor life caught in its own night attitudes.
Certain wild gold arrangements of weed are visible deep in the black.
Four naked alder trunks rise straight up from it
and sway in the blue air. Each trunk
where it enters the ice radiates a map of silver pressures—
thousands of hair-thin cracks catching the white of the light
like a jailed face
catching grins through the bars.
Emily Brontë has a poem about a woman in jail who says
                A messenger of Hope, comes every night to me
                And offers, for short life, eternal Liberty.
I wonder what kind of Liberty this is.
Her critics and commentators say she means death
or a visionary experience that prefigures death.
They understand her prison
as the limitations placed on a clergyman’s daughter
by nineteenth-century life in a remote parish on a cold moor
in the north of England.
They grow impatient with the extreme terms in which she figures prison life.
“In so much of Brontë’s work
the self-dramatising and posturing of these poems teeters
on the brink of a potentially bathetic melodrama,”
says one. Another
refers to “the cardboard sublime” of her caught world.
I stopped telling my psychotherapist about the Nudes
when I realized I had no way to answer her question,
Why keep watching?
Some people watch, that’s all I can say.
There is nowhere else to go,
no ledge to climb up to.
Perhaps I can explain this to her if I wait for the right moment,
as with a very difficult sister.
“On that mind time and experience alone could work:
to the influence of other intellects it was not amenable,”
wrote Charlotte of Emily.
I wonder what kind of conversation these two had
over breakfast at the parsonage.
“My sister Emily
was not a person of demonstrative character,” Charlotte emphasizes,
“nor one on the recesses of whose mind and feelings,
even those nearest and dearest to her could,
with impunity, intrude unlicensed. . . .” Recesses were many.
One autumn day in 1845 Charlotte
“accidentally lighted on a MS. volume of verse in my sister Emily’s   
    handwriting.”
It was a small (4 x 6) notebook
with a dark red cover marked 6d.
and contained 44 poems in Emily’s minute hand.
Charlotte had known Emily wrote verse
but felt “more than surprise” at its quality.
“Not at all like the poetry women generally write.”
Further surprise awaited Charlotte when she read Emily’s novel,
not least for its foul language.
She gently probes this recess
in her Editor’s Preface to Wuthering Heights.
“A large class of readers, likewise, will suffer greatly
from the introduction into the pages of this work
of words printed with all their letters,
which it has become the custom to represent by the initial and final letter
    only—a blank
line filling the interval.”
Well, there are different definitions of Liberty.
Love is freedom, Law was fond of saying.
I took this to be more a wish than a thought
and changed the subject.
But blank lines do not say nothing.
As Charlotte puts it,
“The practice of hinting by single letters those expletives
with which profane and violent persons are wont to garnish their discourse,
strikes me as a proceeding which,
however well meant, is weak and futile.
I cannot tell what good it does—what feeling it spares—
what horror it conceals.”
I turn my steps and begin walking back over the moor
towards home and breakfast. It is a two-way traffic,
the language of the unsaid. My favourite pages
of The Collected Works Of Emily Brontë
are the notes at the back
recording small adjustments made by Charlotte
to the text of Emily’s verse,
which Charlotte edited for publication after Emily’s death.
“Prison for strongest [in Emily’s hand] altered to lordly by Charlotte.”
HERO
I can tell by the way my mother chews her toast
whether she had a good night
and is about to say a happy thing
or not.
Not.
She puts her toast down on the side of her plate.
You know you can pull the drapes in that room, she begins.
This is a coded reference to one of our oldest arguments,
from what I call The Rules Of Life series.
My mother always closes her bedroom drapes tight before going to bed at night.
I open mine as wide as possible.
I like to see everything, I say.
What’s there to see?
Moon. Air. Sunrise.
All that light on your face in the morning. Wakes you up.
I like to wake up.
At this point the drapes argument has reached a delta
and may advance along one of three channels.
There is the What You Need Is A Good Night’s Sleep channel,
the Stubborn As Your Father channel
and random channel.
More toast? I interpose strongly, pushing back my chair.
Those women! says my mother with an exasperated rasp.
Mother has chosen random channel.
Women?
Complaining about rape all the time
I see she is tapping one furious finger on yesterday’s newspaper
lying beside the grape jam.
The front page has a small feature
about a rally for International Women’s Day—
have you had a look at the Sears Summer Catalogue?
Nope.
Why, it’s a disgrace! Those bathing suits—
cut way up to here! (she points) No wonder!
You’re saying women deserve to get raped
because Sears bathing suit ads
have high-cut legs? Ma, are you serious?
Well someone has to be responsible.
Why should women be responsible for male desire? My voice is high.
Oh I see you’re one of Them.
One of Whom? My voice is very high. Mother vaults it.
And whatever did you do with that little tank suit you had last year the green
    one?
It looked so smart on you.
The frail fact drops on me from a great height
that my mother is afraid.
She will be eighty years old this summer.
Her tiny sharp shoulders hunched in the blue bathrobe
make me think of Emily Brontë’s little merlin hawk Hero
that she fed bits of bacon at the kitchen table when Charlotte wasn‘t around.
So Ma, we’ll go—I pop up the toaster
and toss a hot slice of pumpernickel lightly across onto her plate—
visit Dad today? She eyes the kitchen clock with hostility.
Leave at eleven, home again by four? I continue.
She is buttering her toast with jagged strokes.
Silence is assent in our code. I go into the next room to phone the taxi.
My father lives in a hospital for patients who need chronic care
about 50 miles from here.
He suffers from a kind of dementia
characterized by two sorts of pathological change
first recorded in 1907 by Alois Alzheimer.
First, the presence in cerebral tissue
of a spherical formation known as neuritic plaque,
consisting mainly of degenerating brain cells.
Second, neurofibrillary snarlings
in the cerebral cortex and in the hippocampus.
There is no known cause or cure.
Mother visits him by taxi once a week
for the last five years.
Marriage is for better or for worse, she says,
this is the worse.
So about an hour later we are in the taxi
shooting along empty country roads towards town.
The April light is clear as an alarm.
As we pass them it gives a sudden sense of every object
existing in space on its own shadow.
I wish I could carry this clarity with me
into the hospital where distinctions tend to flatten and coalesce.
I wish I had been nicer to him before he got crazy.
These are my two wishes.
It is hard to find the beginning of dementia.
I remember a night about ten years ago
when I was talking to him on the telephone.
It was a Sunday night in winter.
I heard his sentences filling up with fear.
He would start a sentence—about weather, lose his way, start another.
It made me furious to hear him floundering—
my tall proud father, former World War II navigator!
It made me merciless.
I stood on the edge of the conversation,
watching him thrash about for cues,
offering none,
and it came to me like a slow avalanche
that he had no idea who he was talking to.
Much colder today I guess. . . .
his voice pressed into the silence and broke off,
snow falling on it.
There was a long pause while snow covered us both.
Well I won’t keep you,
he said with sudden desperate cheer as if sighting land.
I’ll say goodnight now,
I won’t run up your bill. Goodbye.
Goodbye.
Goodbye. Who are you?
I said into the dial tone.
At the hospital we pass down long pink halls
through a door with a big window
and a combination lock (5—25—3)
to the west wing, for chronic care patients.
Each wing has a name.
The chronic wing is Our Golden Mile
although mother prefers to call it The Last Lap.
Father sits strapped in a chair which is tied to the wall
in a room of other tied people tilting at various angles.
My father tilts least, I am proud of him.
Hi Dad how y’doing?
His face cracks open it could be a grin or rage
and looking past me he issues a stream of vehemence at the air.
My mother lays her hand on his.
Hello love, she says. He jerks his hand away. We sit.
Sunlight flocks through the room.
Mother begins to unpack from her handbag the things she has brought for him,
grapes, arrowroot biscuits, humbugs.
He is addressing strenuous remarks to someone in the air between us.
He uses a language known only to himself,
made of snarls and syllables and sudden wild appeals.
Once in a while some old formula floats up through the wash—
You don’t say! or Happy birthday to you!—
but no real sentence
for more than three years now.
I notice his front teeth are getting black.
I wonder how you clean the teeth of mad people.
He always took good care of his teeth. My mother looks up.
She and I often think two halves of one thought.
Do you remember that gold-plated toothpick
you sent him from Harrod’s the summer you were in London? she asks.
Yes I wonder what happened to it.
Must be in the bathroom somewhere.
She is giving him grapes one by one.
They keep rolling out of his huge stiff fingers.
He used to be a big man, over six feet tall and strong,
but since he came to hospital his body has shrunk to the merest bone house—
except the hands. The hands keep growing.
Each one now as big as a boot in Van Gogh,
they go lumbering after the grapes in his lap.
But now he turns to me with a rush of urgent syllables
that break off on a high note—he waits,
staring into my face. That quizzical look.
One eyebrow at an angle.
I have a photograph taped to my fridge at home.
It shows his World War II air crew posing in front of the plane.
Hands firmly behind backs, legs wide apart,
chins forward.
Dressed in the puffed flying suits
with a wide leather strap pulled tight through the crotch.
They squint into the brilliant winter sun of 1942.
It is dawn.
They are leaving Dover for France.
My father on the far left is the tallest airman,
with his collar up,
one eyebrow at an angle.
The shadowless light makes him look immortal,
for all the world like someone who will not weep again.
He is still staring into my face.
Flaps down! I cry.
His black grin flares once and goes out like a match.
HOT
Hot blue moonlight down the steep sky.
I wake too fast from a cellar of hanged puppies
with my eyes pouring into the dark.
Fumbling
and slowly
consciousness replaces the bars.
Dreamtails and angry liquids
swim back down to the middle of me.
It is generally anger dreams that occupy my nights now.
This is not uncommon after loss of love—
blue and black and red blasting the crater open.
I am interested in anger.
I clamber along to find the source.
My dream was of an old woman lying awake in bed.
She controls the house by a system of light bulbs strung above her on wires.
Each wire has a little black switch.
One by one the switches refuse to turn the bulbs on.
She keeps switching and switching
in rising tides of very hot anger.
Then she creeps out of bed to peer through lattices
at the rooms of the rest of the house.
The rooms are silent and brilliantly lit
and full of huge furniture beneath which crouch
small creatures—not quite cats not quite rats
licking their narrow red jaws
under a load of time.
I want to be beautiful again, she whispers
but the great overlit rooms tick emptily
as a deserted oceanliner and now behind her in the dark
a rustling sound, comes—
My pajamas are soaked.
Anger travels through me, pushes aside everything else in my heart,
pouring up the vents.
Every night I wake to this anger,
the soaked bed,
the hot pain box slamming me each way I move.
I want justice. Slam.
I want an explanation. Slam.
I want to curse the false friend who said I love you forever. Slam.
I reach up and switch on the bedside lamp. Night springs
out the window and is gone over the moor.
I lie listening to the light vibrate in my ears
and thinking about curses.
Emily Brontë was good at cursing.
Falsity and bad love and the deadly pain of alteration are constant topics in
    her verse.
                     Well, thou halt paid me back my love!
                     But if there be a God above
                     Whose arm is strong, whose word is true,
                     This hell shall wring thy spirit too!
The curses are elaborate:
            There go, Deceiver, go! My hand is streaming wet;
            My heart’s blood flows to buy the blessing—To forget!
            Oh could that lost heart give back, back again to thine,
            One tenth part of the pain that clouds my dark decline!
But they do not bring her peace:
       Vain words, vain frenzied thoughts! No ear can hear me call—
       Lost in the vacant air my frantic curses fall. . . .
       Unconquered in my soul the Tyrant rules me still—
       Life bows to my control, but Love I cannot kill!
Her anger is a puzzle.
It raises many questions in me,
to see love treated with such cold and knowing contempt
by someone who rarely left home
“except to go to church or take a walk on the hills”
(Charlotte tells us) and who
had no more intercourse with Haworth folk
than “a nun has
of the country people who sometimes pass her convent gates.”
How did Emily come to lose faith in humans?
She admired their dialects, studied their genealogies,
“but with them she rarely exchanged a word.”
Her introvert nature shrank from shaking hands with someone she met on the moor.
What did Emily know of lover’s lies or cursive human faith?
Among her biographers
is one who conjectures she bore or aborted a child
during her six-month stay in Halifax,
but there is no evidence at all for such an event
and the more general consensus is that Emily did not touch a man in her 31
    years.
Banal sexism aside,
I find myself tempted
to read Wuthering Heights as one thick stacked act of revenge
for all that life withheld from Emily.
But the poetry shows traces of a deeper explanation.
As if anger could be a kind of vocation for some women.
It is a chilly thought.
                           
                              The heart is dead since infancy.
                              Unwept for let the body go.
Suddenly cold I reach down and pull the blanket back up to my chin.
The vocation of anger is not mine.
I know my source.
It is stunning, it is a moment like no other,
when one’s lover comes in and says I do not love you anymore.
I switch off the lamp and lie on my back,
thinking about Emily’s cold young soul.
Where does unbelief begin?
When I was young
there were degrees of certainty.
I could say, Yes I know that I have two hands.
Then one day I awakened on a planet of people whose hands occasionally   
    disappear—
From the next room I hear my mother shift and sigh and settle
back down under the doorsill of sleep.
Out the window the moon is just a cold bit of silver gristle low on fading banks
    of sky.
          Our guests are darkly lodged, I whispered, gazing through
          The vault . . .
THOU
The question I am left with is the question of her loneliness.
And I prefer to put it off.
It is morning.
Astonished light is washing over the moor from north to east.
I am walking into the light.
One way to put off loneliness is to interpose God.
Emily had a relationship on this level with someone she calls Thou. She describes Thou as awake like herself all night
and full of strange power.
Thou woos Emily with a voice that comes out of the night wind.
Thou and Emily influence one another in the darkness,
playing near and far at once.
She talks about a sweetness that “proved us one.”
I am uneasy with the compensatory model of female religious experience and yet,
there is no question,
it would be sweet to have a friend to tell things to at night,
without the terrible sex price to pay.
This is a childish idea, I know.
My education, I have to admit, has been gappy.
The basic rules of male-female relations
were imparted atmospherically in our family,
no direct speech allowed.
I remember one Sunday I was sitting in the backseat of the car.
Father in front.
We were waiting in the driveway for mother,
who came around the corner of the house
and got into the passenger side of the car
dressed in a yellow Chanel suit and black high heels.
Father glanced sideways at her.
Showing a good bit of leg today Mother, he said
in a voice which I (age eleven) thought odd.
I stared at the back of her head waiting for what she would say.
Her answer would clear this up.
But she just laughed a strange laugh with ropes all over it.
Later that summer I put this laugh together with another laugh
I overheard as I was going upstairs.
She was talking on the telephone in the kitchen.
Well a woman would be just as happy with a kiss on the cheek
most of the time but YOU KNOW MEN,
she was saying. Laugh.
Not ropes, thorns.
I have arrived at the middle of the moor
where the ground goes down into a low swampy place.
The swamp water is frozen solid.
Bits of gold weed
have etched themselves
on the underside of the ice like messages.
                        I’ll come when thou art saddest,
                        Laid alone in the darkened room;
                        When the mad day’s mirth has vanished,
                        And the smile of joy is banished,
                         I’ll come when the heart’s real feeling
                         Has entire, unbiased sway,
                         And my influence o’er thee stealing
                         Grief deepening, joy congealing,
                         Shall bear thy soul away.
                         Listen! ’tis just the hour,
                         The awful time for thee:
                         Dost thou not feel upon thy soul
                         A flood of strange sensations roll,
                         Forerunners of a sterner power,
                         Heralds of me?
Very hard to read, the messages that pass
between Thou and Emily.
In this poem she reverses their roles,
speaking not as the victim but to the victim.
It is chilling to watch Thou move upon thou,
who lies alone in the dark waiting to be mastered.
It is a shock to realize that this low, slow collusion
of master and victim within one voice
is a rationale
for the most awful loneliness of the poet’s hour.
She has reversed the roles of thou and Thou
not as a display of power
but to force out of herself some pity
for this soul trapped in glass,
which is her true creation.
Those nights lying alone
are not discontinuous with this cold hectic dawn.
It is who I am.
Is it a vocation of anger?
Why construe silence
as the Real Presence?
Why stoop to kiss this doorstep?
Why be unstrung and pounded flat and pine away
imagining someone vast to whom I may vent the swell of my soul?
Emily was fond of Psalm 130.
“My soul waiteth on Thou more than they that watch for the morning,
I say more than they that watch for the morning.”
I like to believe that for her the act of watching provided a shelter,
that her collusion with Thou gave ease to anger and desire:
”In Thou they are quenched as a fire of thorns,“ says the psalmist.
But for myself I do not believe this, I am not quenched—
with Thou or without Thou I find no shelter.
I am my own Nude.
And Nudes have a difficult sexual destiny.
I have watched this destiny disclose itself
in its jerky passage from girl to woman to who I am now,
from love to anger to this cold marrow,
from fire to shelter to fire.
What is the opposite of believing in Thou—
merely not believing in Thou? No. That is too simple.
That is to prepare a misunderstanding.
I want to speak more clearly.
Perhaps the Nudes are the best way.
Nude #5. Deck of cards.
Each card is made of flesh.
The living cards are days of a woman’s life.
I see a great silver needle go flashing right through the deck once from end to
    end.
Nude #6 I cannot remember.
Nude #7. White room whose walls,
having neither planes nor curves nor angles,
are composed of a continuous satiny white membrane
like the flesh of some interior organ of the moon.
It is a living surface, almost wet.
Lucency breathes in and out.
Rainbows shudder across it.
And around the walls of the room a voice goes whispering,Be very careful. Be very careful.
Nude #8. Black disc on which the fires of all the winds
are attached in a row.
A woman stands on the disc
amid the winds whose long yellow silk flames
flow and vibrate up through her.
Nude #9. Transparent loam.
Under the loam a woman has dug a long deep trench.
Into the trench she is placing small white forms, I don’t know what they are.
Nude #10. Green thorn of the world poking up
alive through the heart of a woman
who lies on her back on the ground.
The thorn is exploding
its green blood above her in the air.Everything it is it has, the voice says.
Nude #11. Ledge in outer space.
Space is bluish black and glossy as solid water
and moving very fast in all directions,
shrieking past the woman who stands pinned
to nothing by its pressure.
She peers and glances for some way to go, trying to lift her hand but cannot.
Nude #12. Old pole in the wind.
Cold currents are streaming over it
and pulling out
into ragged long horizontal black lines
some shreds of ribbon
attached to the pole.
I cannot see how they are attached—
notches? staples? nails? All of a sudden the wind changes
and all the black shreds rise straight up in the air
and tie themselves into knots,
then untie and float down.
The wind is gone.
It waits.
By this time, midway through winter,
I had become entirely fascinated with my spiritual melodrama.
Then it stopped.
Days passed, months passed and I saw nothing.
I continued to peer and glance, sitting on the rug in front of my sofa
in the curtainless morning
with my nerves open to the air like something skinned.
I saw nothing.
Outside the window spring storms came and went.
April snow folded its huge white paws over doors and porches.
I watched a chunk of it lean over the roof and break off
and fall and I thought,
How slow! as it glided soundlessly past,
but still—nothing. No nudes.
No Thou.
A great icicle formed on the railing of my balcony
so I drew up close to the window and tried peering through the icicle,
hoping to trick myself into some interior vision,
but all I saw
was the man and woman in the room across the street
making their bed and laughing.
I stopped watching.
I forgot about Nudes.
I lived my life,
which felt like a switched-off TV.
Something had gone through me and out and I could not own it.
“No need now to tremble for the hard frost and the keen wind.
Emily does not feel them,”
wrote Charlotte the day after burying her sister.
Emily had shaken free.
A soul can do that.
Whether it goes to join Thou and sit on the porch for all eternity
enjoying jokes and kisses and beautiful cold spring evenings,
you and I will never know. But I can tell you what I saw.
Nude #13 arrived when I was not watching for it.
It came at night.
Very much like Nude #1.
And yet utterly different.
I saw a high hill and on it a form shaped against hard air.
It could have been just a pole with some old cloth attached,
but as I came closer
I saw it was a human body
trying to stand against winds so terrible that the flesh was blowing off the bones.
And there was no pain.
The wind
was cleansing the bones.
They stood forth silver and necessary.
It was not my body, not a woman’s body, it was the body of us all.
It walked out of the light.
 
~~~
All this tall grass has ruined my gold
acrylic nails & I know something’s dead
just beyond my window. I grew up
with rats running my floorboards
& know the smell straining from a body
once caught in a trap. In the city
what little I have of an ass
is always out, a simple wind blow
from Marilyn Monroe-ing the street.
Here, in all this nature, there is nobody
but me & my 5 friends for a week
& I promised myself I’d be naked
but the first day I found a tick
clinging to my arm hair for dear
life & decided no way I’m exposing
my pussy to the elements. My love
for nature is like my love for most things:
fickle & theoretical.
Too many bugs & I want a divorce.
Last week, before I was here
my uncle drove me from our city
to the suburbs & sang “Project Chick”
in the car. When we parked
he asked me to take off my shoes
& there we walked, silent, barefoot
circling the lake, trying to not step
in goose shit.
He walked in front & I trailed behind
both our hands clasped behind our backs.    When you were my daughter,
    those were the happiest days of my life.
    I wish you would come home.
~~~
(for Caroline Ireland)



They were to have been a love gift,
but when she slit the paper funnel,
they both saw they were fake; false flowers
he'd picked in haste from the store's display,
handmade coloured stuff, stiff as crinoline.
Instantly she thought of women's hands
cutting in grimy light by a sweatshop window;
rough plank tables strewn with cut-out
flower heads: lily, iris, primula, scentless
chrysanthemums, pistils rigged on wire
in crowns of sponge-tipped stamens,
sepals and petals perfect, perfectly
immune to menaces from the garden.
Why so wrong, so...flattening? Why not instead
symbols of unchanging love?
                                       Yet pretty enough,
she considered, arranging them in a vase
with dry grass and last summer's hydrangeas
whose deadness was still (how to put it?)
alive, or maybe the other side of life.
Two sides, really, of the same thing?
She laughed a little, such ideas were embarrassing
even when kept to oneself,
but her train of thought
carried her in its private tunnel through supper,
and at bedtime, brushing her teeth,
she happened to look up at the moon.
Its sunlit face was turned, as always, in her direction.The full moon, she couldn't help thinking,
though we see only half of it.
It was an insight she decided she could
share with him, but when he joined her
and together they lay in the dark,
there seemed no reason to say anything.
The words, in any case, would be wrong,
would escape or disfigure her meaning.Good was the syllable she murmured to him,
fading into sleep. And just for a split second,
teetering on the verge of it, she believed
everything that had to be was understood.
~~~
1
Who knew it’﻿﻿﻿s quite all right that I downed three
gin-and-tonics (can’﻿﻿﻿t fit male inside
female part on fanny pack) at four
o’﻿﻿﻿clock the Dyke March day of NY Pride?
Who knew Manhattan streets would liquefy
and lurch with dames sans bras, sans hair, sans shirt
in step with beer-can band led by a skirt-
ed trans in green brassiere, led by the cops
whose sentries are staid as posts with glasses on,
lined up beside the march like S/M tops?
(They seem to think Gay Pride’﻿﻿﻿s this weekend’﻿﻿﻿s yawn.)
(Pit stop at McD’﻿﻿﻿s, can’﻿﻿﻿t clip pack back on.)
Who knew she’﻿﻿﻿d march beside me hand-in-hand
and who’﻿﻿﻿d expect me to remember names
when Liz’﻿﻿﻿s girlfriend saw us and waved “Hi.
It’﻿﻿﻿s . . . Anna”? (CNN shot feed, then frames.)
Booze-stymied by the glare of girls and sky,
how could I choose? Should I grip hand, or pray
wondering: Is today today the day
she’﻿﻿﻿ll let me turn the key, lead her inside?
 
     2
Okay, I’﻿﻿﻿m sober now. Today is just
the kind of day she talks but feels no lust.
 
     3
Beside her isn’﻿﻿﻿t bad. Fan-stirred, the air
is humid and the theater is packed.
An ear-cuffed thespian tries to fix the cold,
our leading ladies sweat it out in back.
A prim man to my right begins to sneeze.
My nose is in agreement. The perfume
from Queen Mother there could clear the room.
This shadow play across her face is fine.
Her arm’﻿﻿﻿s near mine, which means exactly nothing.
Hope’﻿﻿﻿s hope hums on through separate listening.
That skull, opaque to me as Midland’﻿﻿﻿s vault,
her silky crop, its pepper dabbed with salt —
I chuckle at an apt sardonic line.
Her suede complexion, lifts up, checks the time.
 
     4. Les Nouvceaux from La Nouvelle Justine
I don’﻿﻿﻿t love her. She doesn’﻿﻿﻿t love me. Neither
does this waiter who may think it strange
when young girls dine with staid dames twice their age
on salade de Bastille and pain de Sade.
I don’﻿﻿﻿t like sitting by her like wet cloth.
I don’﻿﻿﻿t like restaurants whose queers pawn sex
to the bachelor bunch who want a thrill.
I don’﻿﻿﻿t like dining with my, well, not-ex,
both measuring the humid air for signs
of sparks I see by parts will not ignite.
I’﻿﻿﻿d rather have a knock-down, drag-out fight
that cleared the joint than watch another guy
get spanked by Corset Kris, who’﻿﻿﻿d like to grab
a tit, not spend hip humping hairy thighs.
I’﻿﻿﻿d rather I were twice her age and wise.
I’﻿﻿﻿d spin cruel stories of past day of bliss
then give my own hands covert exercise
and send her home to bed without a kiss.
 
     5. L’﻿﻿﻿Addition
 
30 for the play and 10 for gins,
10 for two cabs and 40 for the eats,
at least the metro home was freezer-cold,
at least the Broadway Local still had seats
at 96th, the local went express.
I blistered home ten sockless humid blocks
back to my solo digs for solo sex.
I got this poem for my 90 bucks.
~~~
Summer road the ring around the lake, we drove mostly in silence.Why aren’t I your wife?
You swerved around a turtle sunning itself.
I wanted to go back. To hold the hot disc of it and place it in the grass.
We were late for dinner.One twentieth of a mile an hour, I said. Claws in tar. You turned the car around.
Traffic from the direction of the turtle, and you saw before I did, the fifty bones of the carapace,
crushed roman dome, the surprise of red blood.
I couldn’t help crying, couldn’t keep anything from harm.I’m sorry, you said, and let it hurt.
The relief, always, of you in the seat beside me, you’ll never know.
Driving that road next winter, you remembered that place in the road. Your turtle.
During hibernation, a turtle’s heart beats once for every ten minutes.
It cannot voluntarily open its eyes.
~~~
I used an arrow to kill the spider.   I used a steamroller to flatten the worm.   For the ants I called in an air strike.   Bee that found its way in through the screen:   blowtorch.   The mammals were easier—   a bucket of water for submerging the cat,   a poisoned word thrown to the dog.   For love, only a kitchen match. That   and a stove leaking gas   and waiting until the dinner   was good and burned.
~~~
She had forgotten how the August night
Was level as a lake beneath the moon,
In which she swam a little, losing sight
Of shore; and how the boy, who was at noon
Simple enough, not different from the rest,
Wore now a pleasant mystery as he went,
Which seemed to her an honest enough test
Whether she loved him, and she was content.
So loud, so loud the million crickets’ choir. . .
So sweet the night, so long-drawn-out and late. . .
And if the man were not her spirit’s mate,
Why was her body sluggish with desire?
Stark on the open field the moonlight fell,
But the oak tree’s shadow was deep and black and
     secret as a well.
 
~~~
I’m having trouble understanding the wife.
The wife seems like she is only there as a foil to your actions.
I want to know how the wife feels when you drag her
and your son down into the basement to start a new religion.
The religion has something to do with cowering
before a force greater than yourself and then being buried alive.
I want to know how the wife behaves in small, enclosed spaces:
if she is trying to comfort your son by telling him Daddy likes
to play funny games, or if she is already visualizing
herself walking into a women’s shelter, your son
on her back and maybe, because this is a fantasy,
she carries a burning torch, like an angry villager, or a goddess.
Does the wife merit any revenge after you weed whack
the coffee table? Does she agree with you that the coffee table
is yours to destroy because you built it? What has she built
in the house that is hers to destroy? What kind of childhood
has the wife endured that allows her to understand you?
In her past life or lives, was the wife ever a shepherdess?
Does she see you as a sort of Pan, goatish, and pricked
by ticks, but also very well-endowed? When the wife transforms
into a tree can she still think or is she just a green haze
inside, an idea of growing? I would like to see the wife
peel off that bark, leaving only enough for modesty’s sake,
although as this is your poem, we can take a bit more off.
I want to see her uproot herself, pick up the house and shake it.
How many people fall out?
The wife has something about her the Germans
would call unheimlich. I sometimes catch a glimpse of the wife
out of the corner of my eye but then I look away.
I cannot look directly at the wife. The wife is a conflagration
of everything dear. I wonder sometimes if she is faking;
There is a certain note she holds too long
so the orgasm is more operatic, less genuine.
When she cries, Oh my God, really, she should stutter.
Let’s say the wife wakes up in the morning.
You have already made breakfast. Does your kindness feel oppressive?
Does she want to take your weed whacker through the house?
Has she ever, in a fit of anger, destroyed your pornography?
When you found a picture of the wife online with a foreign handprint
smacked red on her ass, how quickly did your shock turn to arousal?
Are you aware the wife is breaking down in public places,
and sometimes cannot move for thirty minutes? Sometimes
her arm goes entirely numb from the shoulder down. I think the wife
might need some fine-tuning, some elbow grease,
some wrenching apart, and then reassembling.
~~~
My shadow followed me to San Diego
   silently, she never complained.
No green card, no identity pass,
   she is wedded to my fate.
The moon is a drunk and anorectic,
   constantly reeling, changing weight.
My shadow dances grotesquely,
   resentful she can't leave me.
The moon mourns his unwritten novels,
   cries naked into the trees and fades.
Tomorrow, he'll return to beat me
   blue—again, again and again.
Goodbye Moon, goodbye Shadow.
   My husband, my lover, I'm late.
The sun will plunge through the window.
   I must make my leap of faith.
~~~
You said I will pull you out of my body in 237
ways. What you wanted was beautifully to
sever things. Here love: the same things. changed.
 
Finally: a taxonomy of afterthoughts. As though
you were the one who was
sleeping. Breathing in the marrow of would.
 
You, who are a valley of no, I hear the music leaking. (How she.
How she. How I.) You say low key and I do not believe you.
I forgive everything: the perseveration of skin.
 
My hands that are a chopping block and I
cannot touch him. I cannot touch him
without not touching me.
 
Because if you leave, and you are already leaving, there are three.
But you say less than three. And the couch, in your absence,
is crenellated. And who is going to watch us as we leave.
 
To add to the list of changing things: life preservers are no longer
about preservation. They have become less holy. P F D =
personal flotation device. Endlessly possible. Unlike wood.
 
Stacey May Fowles wants a lover who will hit her.
(I do not believe in submission.) I want you to erase me.
This is a kindness. A kindness you tell me. A kindness I do not deserve.
 
On the floor. By the bed. Hotel Congress. March 19, 2005.
Room #23. We are a long way from disintegrated. You said Now. Look at me. And I did. And you bloomed.
 
(When my mother died, I will say.
Many years after my mother has died.
But I will not believe her. I'll be like my grandmother who
 
despite my parade of girlfriends and her profession
that nobody should be mean to them, stilldoesn't believe in being queer.
 I don't believe in being dead,
I'll tell my dead mother. And just like you
she'll repeat herself. Happy New Year. Happy New Year. Happy New.)
 
I expect there will be a morning when you walk up to this very gate
while I am sitting here. I know this. I know you less each time I see you.
 I know this like I know you are more lonely than glass.
 
To your languishing. To your bubbly.
To your recent. To your hologram. To your desperately.
To your seeking. To your dictaphone. To your you.
 
Neuromuscular facilitation is just another way of saying
Vancouver. Always is yet a matter of roller derby. Just
in love with you. You, more than sleep.
 
In the top drawer is a photograph of them touching.
It is not so much that it is a photograph.
It is that it is a depiction of what. not could.
 
I want to tell you about my body. About testosterone
as unwitting art historian. About recovery. Me(n). What it feels like
underneath there. The part you cannot know. but should.
 
Either way. It's a house. It's a house
like everyone else has. I take things away.
I don't take them for good.
 
How delirious must we sound when we are falling.I miss you, you can't even imagine. And how bad
at math. Less than three. Less than three. Less than three.
 
And what if. I completely remember
it wrong. What if I remember there were two
of us. And then what if. there was only one death.
 
I do not believe in the existence of holes
that lead to nowhere. Muscle memory remains an enigma. Still, you can
touch her. You cannot touch her without not touching me.
 
(And still) you are not not a part of me. The world is
uncharacteristically unresponsive.
I could thank you. You stay with me. like grass.
 
~~~
“There is no muse of translation,” the translator reminds
as he struggles with Pindar’s victory odes, and what he means
is that the imagery is overwhelming: the hissing of snakes
as Medusa’s sisters mourn her death, the baby Iamos
“lying on a bed of yellow and purple violets,” Heracles
with his baby hands strangling the two serpents sent
“to devour him on the day of his birth” so every translator
must beware of “rank transplantation.” Just imagine,
if one were to translate the line as “Forge your tongue
on the anvil of truth.” How ridiculous that admonition
to a king. Better to transpose to the vague modern,
though Pindar “perversely, from our point of view—often
seems to relish... the concrete image,” and it’s just
there that I think perhaps all being is translation; the child
I was at the kitchen table, translating my mother into
my father, my father into my mother; each one’s
“inviolate honey” becoming the “blameless venom”
of the other. So now I too prefer the naked tongue,
even pained and writing, caught in hammer and tongs,
flexed and torqued upon the anvil, until the metal
turns mercurial, quick, spilling into and out of
the shape of everything that is. For all day, while that pair
of grey-eyed serpents feeds the abandoned
child on honey, and the e-mail box fills with a multitude
of voices debating the distinctions of the hoaxes
of authorship—the pseudonym, the heteronym, all the masks
we can put on—I have trembled
because of my tongue. Because it insisted
upon saying I love you. So it waits and waits for some word from you.
It’s late in the afternoon when you finally reply and then to the quote
I sent to a list. I read obliquely, wondering
if I should hope because you say you’re thinking
of Shakespeare’s sonnets (the beloved and the lover’s love)
or if I’m lost to the shadows you’re going off to dispel
with a cup of coffee, that “best” at the end
of your letter, my allotment from now on. Is it too much love
or too little that I have translated into being? Oh by now
I’m mistyping forget your tongue upon the anvil
that the tongue itself has made.
 
~~~
I. ENOUGH ! we're tired, my heart and I.
  We sit beside the headstone thus,
  And wish that name were carved for us.The moss reprints more tenderly
  The hard types of the mason's knife,
  As heaven's sweet life renews earth's lifeWith which we're tired, my heart and I.II. You see we're tired, my heart and I.
  We dealt with books, we trusted men,
  And in our own blood drenched the pen,As if such colours could not fly.
  We walked too straight for fortune's end,
  We loved too true to keep a friend ;At last we're tired, my heart and I.III. How tired we feel, my heart and I !
  We seem of no use in the world ;
  Our fancies hang grey and uncurledAbout men's eyes indifferently ;
  Our voice which thrilled you so, will let
  You sleep; our tears are only wet :What do we here, my heart and I ?IV. So tired, so tired, my heart and I !
  It was not thus in that old time
  When Ralph sat with me 'neath the limeTo watch the sunset from the sky.
  Dear love, you're looking tired,' he said;
  I, smiling at him, shook my head :'Tis now we're tired, my heart and I.V. So tired, so tired, my heart and I !
  Though now none takes me on his arm
  To fold me close and kiss me warmTill each quick breath end in a sigh
  Of happy languor. Now, alone,
  We lean upon this graveyard stone,Uncheered, unkissed, my heart and I.VI. Tired out we are, my heart and I.
  Suppose the world brought diadems
  To tempt us, crusted with loose gemsOf powers and pleasures ? Let it try.
  We scarcely care to look at even
  A pretty child, or God's blue heaven,We feel so tired, my heart and I.VII. Yet who complains ? My heart and I ?
  In this abundant earth no doubt
  Is little room for things worn out :Disdain them, break them, throw them by
  And if before the days grew rough
  We once were loved, used, — well enough,I think, we've fared, my heart and I.
~~~
Good Heav’n, I thank thee, since it was designedI should be framed, but of the weaker kind,That yet, my Soul, is rescued from the loveOf all those trifles which their passions move.Pleasures and praise and plenty have with meBut their just value. If allowed they be,Freely, and thankfully as much I taste,As will not reason or religion waste,If they’re denied, I on my self can live,And slight those aids unequal chance does give.When in the sun, my wings can be displayed,And, in retirement, I can bless the shade.
~~~
In the ocean one fish
swallows the other:
a geometric progression of
loss.
You are bigger than I.
The calamity of love
swelling out larger than us.
And what destiny partakes of
our dilemma?
Swallows the cause and effect:
eyes and kissing mouths and enlarged
parts wanting to breathe and wanting. 
There is no gentle sense to this.
Is there?
Only a kind of terror
at the chain
of events, the scale of loss, the ordered 
destruction one against the other—
all that something larger
awaits its moment. 
~~~
for Dylan



I watch the ocean square into a turning
Burn. Burning, my holes glass over. Lightning
Hits the beach, melts me shut. I’ve drowned
Before, in the bye along a row of shored
 
Rocks. From the barrel chest butcher I buy
Tight roasts. This year’s man, his clownish dog walks me
In the park until I die on his leash and domestic
Night’s sticky seizures. I thumb and ♥ it
 
Like liking a million times. The rich own long
Lighthouses to show us how away from them
We are. Past waiting for the press of his chest
To my back, I hobby along to the next hem’s
 
Promise. Again I straddle the blade thinking
This is the time it will fill the gash. 
 
~~~
Stone by stone, body by body in the grass: For this we trade our lone compass, Become swans instead, adrift in glaze- Light, kilned in the arms of each other Into vessel-vassal new. Or shrew, As the case may be. What would you do?  Listen to the footsteps in the thistles. Put the kettle on for tea, and whisper it to me.
~~~
go on sister sing your song
lady redbone señora rubia
took all day long
shampooing her nubia
she gets to the getting place
without or with him
must I holler when   
you’re giving me rhythm
members don’t get weary   
add some practice to your theory
she wants to know is it a men thing
or a him thing
wishing him luck   
she gave him lemons to suck
told him please dear
improve your embouchure
~~~
It was twilight all day.
Sometimes the smallest things weigh us down,
small stones that we can't help
admiring and palming.
Look at the tiny way
this lighter vein got inside.
Look at the heavy gray dome of its sky.
This is no immutable world.
We know less than its atoms, rushing through.
Light, light. Light as air, to them,
for all we know. Trust me on this one,
there is happiness at stake.
Boulder, grain. Planet, dust:
What fills the stones fills us.
I remember, or I have a feeling,
I could be living somewhere with you,
weighted down the way we aren't now.
Often the greatest things,
those you'd think would be the heaviest,
are the very ones that float.
~~~
November 2015
                         1
Open up for close
out    soul-clothes    every-
thing has to go    closing
down time    call them all
saints    souls    my own gone
ones:  Andy    Marcia    Mary Alice
Mary Anne     cloud of all    carried out
 
2 
outside my window: locust, cloth
of gold     on the ground: its yellow
tabs   linden hearts   sweetgum stars
like cut-outs from the same ...    
paper-napkin ghosts in a tree near
the house where a year ago my friend — 
rust-colored chrysanthemums   rust-colored door
 
3 
door to door the angel no the Lord
passed or did not pass — 
the angel opened the prison
door     doors to pass through, out
or in:  our millions, more than any — 
in the other story the Lord
said:  to put a difference between
 
4 
between one and another
a gun:  at one end it’s a good
gun because at the other’s a cell
phone pill bottle toy gun nothing a
Trayvon    Tamir    Dontre    Michael
Laquan    Eric    Rekia    John:    call
them out and the others, black and many
 
5 many thousand gone    no
more auction block
~~~
O Donald! ye are just the man
 Who, when he’s got a wife,Begins to fratch— nae notice ta’en—
 They’re strangers a’ their life.The fan may drop— she takes it up,
 The husband keeps his chair;She hands the kettle— gives his cup—
 Without e’en— thank ye, dear.”Now, truly, these slights are but toys;
 But frae neglects like these,The wife may soon a slattern grow,
 And strive nae mair to please.For wooers ay do all they can
 To trifle wi’ the mind;They hold the blaze of beauty up,
 And keep the poor things blind.But wedlock tears away the veil,
 The goddess is nae mair;He thinks his wife a silly thing,
 She thinks her man a bear.Let then the lover be the friend—
 The loving friend for life;Think but thysel the happiest spouse,
 She’ll be the happiest wife.
~~~
Trying to see the proportional relation
Of one memory to another
One is so strange, and then
To try and see what looms
And doesn’t for the other person
Who was there, it gets stranger,
Especially when you’ve read
His email.
I don’t know how people
Understand their lives, measure
Their sensations against “objective”
Or so-to-speak democratic estimations,
Whether people accept the externality
Of events, “events,” as things
That happen to them. I refuse
To accept some coagulate
Of other people’s
Impressions in exchange for this
Privacy, no matter how flawed it is.
This is lyric poetry. It has to be. It has
No other hope. What was it
About you and me that made whatever
Happen to us. In New York
Everything fell apart. What I dreaded
And expected.
But still. Tonight
It is dark and the weather is cooler
Than it’s been. It has taken
A while for Fall to break; the global
Warming kept me in summer
Love with you like I was under a
Fermata. Now that the times
Are changing, I feel
Even more for you; or I feel nothing.
I can’t tell; it’s kind
Of scary. I was sick of thinking
About you this morning but
I was listening to Bob Dylan and Leonard
Cohen in order to think about
You for literary purposes.
When I feel nothing for a person
I get scared I’m losing my humanity
And that turning cold means
My heart’s been botoxed: we’re
All fucked.
I watched a movie on YouTube
Called Ladies and Gentlemen, MisterLeonard Cohen that was made when
He was still just a poet and only
Famous in Canada.
He’s a pretentious little nerd
In it, self-important, teacher’s pet wit.
I think that, making music, he became
So much nakeder, much more desperate.
The talent, real, even pure, evenNatural, had to ripen in
The artificial man.
Alain Badiou, on the day
Of his class, said, “Because an event
Is pure rapture, an event disappears
Immediately: it does not exist
Objectively, but only by appearing
And disappearing.” This is both
Precise and vague; it is attractive
I guess. I guess since you and me did not
Disappear immediately, it was
Not pure rapture, not in these
Terms, but my smile
Was real each time I swallowed
Your cum. Getting
Fucked by you was great; I could
Feel it in my organs, but
You didn’t make me go insane
Except for maybe once
Or twice. Actually maybe I am
Being unfair. Maybe the fucking really
Was that great. In this moment I
Can’t remember.
I just read a poetry
Review in which the reviewer
States that a certain book
Made his cock feel as though
It were tall as a tree. That’s
Nice. I have no idea
What it feels like to have
A cock. Sometimes I feel
As though I’m getting close
To understanding and then
Something happens to make
Me have no clue again. When Sinan
Fucks me, we lose our individuality
So severely it’s like we’re both
Gasping after an animal that’s his
Cock that is beyond us and I lose
All sense of the world. His cock’s
Not even him, and he’s not him either
And we aren’t anything.
It’s strange, the possessive. Didn’t Thomas
Mann write a book called HerrUnd Hund or something like that?
Man’s best friend. What belongs
To him. Me and Sunder
Talked about how scary and arousing
It is to watch men masturbate, cos
Everyone relates differently to his.
Like dicks are always almost but never
Quite another. Je est un autre,
Said that brat Arthur Rimbaud.
I am definitely in love with you
As I write this. You are so petty
And superfluous I cannot stand
You. Sinan is definitely
In love with me. I know, because
I saw him tonight. I love
Him too. You are gracious
To accord me the space and time
In which to develop, or to elaborate
Upon, as the French say, these
Extreme emotions I am, despite
The odds and certain lapses,
So capable of feeling.
It was good to slap
Your face and to admit
That your asshole
Made me nervous.
Your eyes had a way
Of going soft and shiny
When you said the really
Tender things. We admitted
It was intimidating
For us both to hear each other describe
People we’ve fucked and been
In love with. I’m proud of what
We accomplished together. Alain Badiou
Ended his class with a reading
Of “Ariane et Barbe-Bleue” which
Is an opera by Paul Dukas. You
And me had gone pretty far
By the time this day came, and
Something very fragile in me breaks
When somebody says my name, or
Even a variant of it. I was tired.
I think Badiou discusses “Ariane”
In Being and Event which
I have not read. In class he said
That the story of the opera is
About the relationship between law
And freedom, and that it shows
That the desire for freedom is not
So simple. Ariane experiences an Event
That causes her to demand freedom, Badiou
Said, but she is unable to convince anybody
Else, any other women to want freedom; she ends up alone.
She genuinely falls in love with the wicked
Bluebeard at the beginning. Bluebeard
Who previously got women by having a castle
To lock them in. This woman Ariane
Does not have to be taken
By force. When she enters
His castle he hands
Her seven keys, six
Of which he gives her permission
To use, and leaves. She hears the cries
Of his other, imprisoned wives,
Coming from behind a door. So she uses
The forbidden key, releasing them.
Meanwhile Bluebeard is assaulted
By the local peasants, who want
To free Ariane, fearing her fate will turn out like
That of the women who came before her.
But Ariane is already free
In herself, and proves this freedom
By bringing the wounded Bluebeard
Home, caring tenderly for him, and then
Declaring that she’s leaving him for good.
By the end Bluebeard’s shattered, sobbing,
Bleeding. Ariane
Invites the other wives to leave with her
In a wrenching aria, pleading
With them one by one to taste
With her the freedom awaiting
Them, The World. But they all prefer confinement
Even though they had longed
For freedom before Ariane opened
Their door. Once liberty arrived they were no
Longer capable of it, preferring to serve; even a gutted,
Hollowed-out power. Ariane exits
Alone. The end. Badiou narrated
This with emotion and
I cried. Maybe cos I was tired and
That thing about my name or because
I am not heroic or free.
I had missed half of Alain Badiou’s
Lectures messing around with you
On the couch by the fire; in the women’s
Toilets; up on the hill. If this were a suitable parable,
And it isn’t, I would try to tell myself
That those very early mornings in Brooklyn when I sat
Up in your bed feeling wrong and
Got dressed and walked away, I should
Have stayed away cos I don’t need you.
Maybe I don’t need you. But I want
You. Maybe I don’t love you. But
I am getting to know you. Maybe
What made me cry in class was how tired
I was and how sad and hard
It is, and how rare, to undertake an act
That’s truly free, and not just a response
To a confused surge of drives and  fears.
~~~
My child is sitting cross-legged on the floor reading to herself.
Sometimes she is so full of need I push her to the floor.
Only once I did that and I don’t even remember the moment
right, but I was trying to wipe urine off my leg and she was
naughty like a squirrel and jumping and singing and her head
slammed into my chin, which hurt and even more than that,
it pissed me off, because she’s my beautiful child, but in that
button snap of a moment she was suddenly just one more person
and I pushed her away in a way that felt to me like setting her
down, but awkwardly, because of how she was also balancing
her feet on my feet as I tried to pour out a bowl of pee
from her little potty as a toothbrush dangled foaming
from my mouth. Somewhere in the mess of that morning
she’d become person enough to, in the space between us,
create force of momentum, and then I did not set her down,
but pushed her and she fell away from it against the wall
and was crying because I, her mommy, pushed her. And I know
this should be the poem about how I’m horrified at myself,
the poem about what in ourselves we have to live with,
but in that moment which followed two years of breastfeeding
and baby-wearing and sixty-nine hours of natural childbirth
and the hemorrhaging and the uncertain operation, after which
I pumped every two hours, careful not to let the cord tangle
in the IV. Even then when she cried and no matter what
and no matter and no matter and no matter and no matter what,
I held her all night if she cried so she would not ever know
someday you’ll cry alone, but I held her and ached and leaked
and bled too as long as it took. Of course there’ve been nights
since but sometimes it feels as if I’ve never been asleep again,
so when I say I pushed my two-year-old against a wall and I don’t
remember it happening that way but it happened and I did
and I’ve been wondering a long time now what the limit is
and when I would find the end of myself, and that day, which
was yesterday, was the end. And this day, when we played
hide-and-seek with Daddy, and touched bugs, and readFrog and Toad Are Friends twice together before she read it
to herself as I wrote this, this is the day that comes after.
~~~
All my life I’ve asked my master
Why I am unable to choose
This sweet man or fancy shoes
Over this stranger, more difficult lover
And these expensive but practical loafers
And why I am unable to author
A book exhibiting my full potential
And have focused instead on inconsequential
Letters to strange and difficult lovers
Who by my letters were never changed.
I certainly haven’t been constrained
By terrible parents or trauma or poverty
And even if I had it wouldn’t explain
My propensity for misery
Anymore than it would my
Propensity for joy.
Maybe I’m just a procrastinator
As life is a procrastination of death
And each breath just a procrastination of breath
And friends a procrastination of work
And work a procrastination of love
And love a procrastination I’m just not above.
~~~
They are thin
and rarely marry, living out
their long lives
in spacious rooms, French doors
giving view to formal gardens
where aromatic flowers
grow in profusion.
They play their pianos
in the late afternoon
tilting their heads
at a gracious angle
as if listening
to notes pitched above
the human range.
Age makes them translucent;
each palpitation of their hearts
visible at temple or neck.
When they die, it’s in their sleep,
their spirits shaking gently loose
from a hostess too well bred
to protest.
~~~
What do we need for love—a midnight fire
Flinging itself by fistfuls up the chimney
In soft bright snatches? Do we need the snow,
Gentle as silence, covering the scars
Of weeks of hunger, years of shabby having?
Summer or winter? A heaven of stars? A room?
The smiling mouth, the sadness of desire
Are everywhere the same. If lovers go
Along an unknown road, they find no less
What is familiar. Let them stay at home,
And all will still be strange. This they know
Who with each heartbeat fight the fear of change.
~~~
No more alone sleeping, no more alone waking,
 Thy dreams divided, thy prayers in twain;Thy merry sisters tonight forsaking,
 Never shall we see, maiden, again.Never shall we see thee, thine eyes glancing.
 Flashing with laughter and wild in glee,Under the mistletoe kissing and dancing,
 Wantonly free.There shall come a matron walking sedately,
  Low-voiced, gentle, wise in reply.Tell me, O tell me, can I love her greatly?
 All for her sake must the maiden die!
~~~
Guy calls the doctor, says the wife’s   
contractions are five minutes apart.   
Doctor says, Is this her first child?
guy says, No, it’s her husband.
I promise to try to remember who   
I am. Wife gets up on one elbow,
says, I wanted to get married.   
It seemed a fulfillment of some
several things, a thing to be done.   
Even the diamond ring was some
thing like a quest, a thing they   
set you out to get and how insane
the quest is; how you have to turn   
it every way before you can even
think to seek it; this metaphysical   
refraining is in fact the quest. Who’d
have guessed? She sighs, I like   
the predictability of two, I like
my pleasures fully expected,   
when the expectation of them
grows patterned in its steady   
surprise. I’ve got my sweet
and tumble pat. Here on earth,   
I like to count upon a thing
like that. Thus explained   
the woman in contractions
to her lover holding on
the telephone for the doctor
to recover from this strange   
conversational turn. You say
you’re whom? It is a pleasure   
to meet you. She rolls her
eyes, but he’d once asked her   Am I your first lover? and she’d   
said, Could be. Your face looks   
familiar.
~~~
Love is like the wild rose-briar,Friendship like the holly-tree—The holly is dark when the rose-briar bloomsBut which will bloom most constantly?The wild rose-briar is sweet in spring,Its summer blossoms scent the air;Yet wait till winter comes againAnd who will call the wild-briar fair?Then scorn the silly rose-wreath nowAnd deck thee with the holly’s sheen,That when December blights thy browHe still may leave thy garland green.
~~~
When beauty breaks and falls asunder   
I feel no grief for it, but wonder.
When love, like a frail shell, lies broken,   
I keep no chip of it for token.
I never had a man for friend
Who did not know that love must end.   
I never had a girl for lover
Who could discern when love was over.   
What the wise doubt, the fool believes—
Who is it, then, that love deceives?
~~~
When our two souls stand up erect and strong, Face to face, silent, drawing nigh and nigher, Until the lengthening wings break into fire At either curvéd point, — what bitter wrong Can the earth do to us, that we should not long Be here contented ? Think. In mounting higher, The angels would press on us, and aspire To drop some golden orb of perfect song Into our deep, dear silence. Let us stay Rather on earth, Belovèd, — where the unfit Contrarious moods of men recoil away And isolate pure spirits, and permit A place to stand and love in for a day, With darkness and the death-hour rounding it.
~~~
Because she'd heard him laugh through new moon darkness
and she knew he'd fallen and she knew, before she turned,
he'd be crawling, like a crawdad, rock to loam—
because she tried to love the straight back and neck
he'd erected to recollect the man he'd been
before—because she found herself adding up his usefulness
like some kind of auctioneer—she showed him
the dark coils areoling both her breasts and all the ways
she bent and lifted, bent and lifted, steady, strong.
She let him believe he was past due for a harvest
and her hands were the right ones, now, to hold onto the scythe.
 
                                                         • 
She made quick work of pleasure. The boysmile bunked down
in his eyes, she claimed. Her tongue found the place in his mouth
where the teeth were gone—where he'd hold his corncakes
until they grew soft enough to chew. History had bedded him
in all of this—his own history and failures not his own.
Before he'd tramped in she'd watched another man—a man she'd thought
she'd hated—watched his body opened, opened, opened until
blood had married brine. She'd watch that man be whipped into something
good for nothing more than fertilizing clay and she'd thought
buckshot would have been a brand of kindness if sprayed into him
just then. But even after his hard going, she did not miss him very much.
                                                        •
Anyone she chose could be shucked like surplus property tomorrow,
but that hadn't been enough to warn her off of picking him that night.
Because she knew if she set her sight on nothing she'd get nothing
in return, she'd walked with him. But because the night progressed so
—because there were some clouds—no stars—no moon—he'd tripped
over the branch of a dead and down tree. In all that darkness,
there, without a moon, even then, she had not fallen. She thought
to say so, but she did not say so. She did nothing
but say she was sorry for him. She did not use her mouth
to say this. Could he not listen to her hands? They spoke softly,
articulating her condolences, to his torn and bleeding skin.
 
~~~
Time only cause of my unrestBy whom I hop’d once to bee blest    How cruell art thou turned?That first gav’st lyfe unto my love,And still a pleasure nott to move    Or change though ever burned;Have I thee slack’d, or left undunOne loving rite, and soe have wunn    Thy rage or bitter changing?That now noe minutes I shall see,Wherein I may least happy bee    Thy favors soe estranging.Blame thy self, and nott my folly,Time gave time butt to bee holly;    True love such ends best lovethUnworhty love doth seeke for endsA worthy love butt worth pretends    Nor other thoughts itt proveth:Then stay thy swiftnes cruell time,And lett mee once more blessed clime    To joy, that I may prayse thee:Lett mee pleasure sweetly tastingJoy in love, and faith nott wasting    And on fames wings I’le rayse thee:Never shall thy glory dyingBee untill thine owne untying    That time noe longer liveth;T’is a gaine such tyme to lend:Since soe thy fame shall never end    Butt joy for what she giveth.
~~~
You were never a man
in the television sense of the word.
I was never a wild Slinky
in the sex-club sense of a toy.
You were never a tobacco store
in the Modernist sense of a trope.
I was never a snowdrop
in the candy store sense of a treat.
You were never Day-glo
in the fashionista sense of a scarf.
I was never withyouallthetime
in the username sense of a self.
You were never a strumpet
in the toothache sense of an insult.
I was never a tooting horn
in the childhood sense of a game.
You were never a hole-in-my-heart   
in the country singer sense of a vista.
I was never a paper doll
in the pyromaniac sense of a pal.
You were never a parenthesis
in the phony secret sense of a sign.
I was never red lipstick
in the pulp novel sense of a threat.
You were never a word
in the mystic sense of an obstacle.
I was never a shaking castanet   
in the midnight sense of a song.
~~~
Through your lens the sequoia swallowed me   
like a dryad. The camera flashed & forgot.
I, on the other hand, must practice my absent-
mindedness, memory being awkward as a touch   
that goes unloved. Lately your eyes have shut
down to a shade more durable than skin’s. I know you   
love distance, how it smooths. You choose an aerial view,   
the city angled to abstraction, while I go for the close   
exposures: poorly-mounted countenances along Broadway,   
the pigweed cracking each hardscrabble backlot.   
It’s a matter of perspective: yours is to love me   
from a block away & mine is to praise the grain-
iness that weaves expressively: your face.
~~~
Do I still long for my virginity?— Fragment 107



I never longed for my virginity.I heard it on the radio after the hurricane. There, in the aftermath, was the voice of a man —once the sweet, screwed-up boy whose hooded, jessed spirit I tried to possess with the ruthlessness I mistook for power. Here he was on NPR, so gentle, so familiar with devastation, his timbre woke the teenage falconer in me who once saw his kindness as weakness, saw a boy as an unfledged goshawk —a creature to trap and be trapped within darkened mews. I knew the rules: neither of us could sleep until the molting bird grew ravenous enough to take the raw mouse from my hand. Breaking the falconbroke us both, left us scared and less aware of  love than fear.
~~~
When the man behind the counter said, “You pay

by the orifice,” what could we do but purchase them all?

 

Ah, Sandy, you were clearly the deluxe doll, modish and pert

in your plastic nurse whites, official hostess to our halcyon days,

 

where you bobbed in the doorway of our dishabille apartment,

a block downwind from the stockyards. Holding court on

 

the corroded balcony, K. and I passed hash brownies, collecting

change for the building’s monthly pool to predict which balcony

 

would fall off next. That’s when K. was fucking M. and M. was

fucking J., and even B. and I threw down once on the glass-speckled

 

lawn, adrift in the headlights of his El Camino. Those were immortal

times, Sandy! Coke wasn’t addictive yet, condoms prevented herpes

 

and men were only a form of practice for the Russian novel

we foolishly hoped our lives would become. Now it’s a Friday night,

 

sixteen years from there. Don’t the best characters know better

than to live too long? My estranged husband house-sits for a spoiled
 

cockatoo while saving to buy his own place. My lover’s gone back

to his gin and the farm-team fiancée he keeps in New York.

 

What else to do but read Frank O’Hara to my tired three-year-old?

When I put him to bed, he mutters “more sorry” as he turns into sleep.

 

Tonight, I find you in a box I once marked “The Past.” Well,

therapy’s good for some things, Sandy, but who’d want to forgive

 

a girl like that? Frank says Destroy yourself if you don’t know!

Deflated, you’re simply the smile that surrounds a hole.

                                                                                     I don’t know anything.
~~~
Tom, will you let me love you in your restaurant?
I will let you make me a sandwich of your invention and I will eat it and call
it a carolyn sandwich. Then you will kiss my lips and taste the mayon­naise and 
that is how you shall love me in my restaurant
Tom, will you come to my empty beige apartment and help me set up my daybed?
Yes, and I will put the screws in loosely so that when we move on it, later,
it will rock like a cradle and then you will know you are my baby
Tom, I am sitting on my dirt bike on the deck. Will you come out from the kitchen
and watch the people with me?
Yes, and then we will race to your bedroom. I will win and we will tangle up
on your comforter while the sweat rains from our stomachs and fore­heads
Tom, the stars are sitting in tonight like gumball gems in a little girl’s 
jewelry box. Later can we walk to the duck pond?
Yes, and we can even go the long way past the jungle gym. I will push you on
the swing, but promise me you’ll hold tight. If you fall I might disappear
Tom, can we make a baby together? I want to be a big pregnant woman with a
loved face and give you a squalling red daughter.
No, but I will come inside you and you will be my daughter
Tom, will you stay the night with me and sleep so close that we are one person?
No, but I will lie down on your sheets and taste you. There will be feathers
of you on my tongue and then I will never forget you
Tom, when we are in line at the convenience store can I put my hands in your
back pockets and my lips and nose in your baseball shirt and feel the crook
of your shoulder blade?
No, but later you can lie against me and almost touch me and when I go I will
leave my shirt for you to sleep in so that always at night you will be pressed
up against the thought of me
Tom, if I weep and want to wait until you need me will you promise that someday
you will need me?
No, but I will sit in silence while you rage, you can knock the chairs down
any mountain. I will always be the same and you will always wait
Tom, will you climb on top of the dumpster and steal the sun for me? It’s just
hanging there and I want it.
No, it will burn my fingers. No one can have the sun: it’s on loan from God.
But I will draw a picture of it and send it to you from Richmond and then you
can smooth out the paper and you will have a piece of me as well as the sun
Tom, it’s so hot here, and I think I’m being born. Will you come back from
Richmond and baptise me with sex and cool water?
I will come back from Richmond. I will smooth the damp spiky hairs from the
back of your neck and then I will lick the salt off it. Then I will leave
Tom, Richmond is so far away. How will I know how you love me?
I have left you. That is how you will know
~~~
Again this morning my eyes woke up too close
to your eyes,
their almost green orbs
too heavy-lidded to really look back.
To wake up next to you
is ordinary. I do not even need to look at you
to see you.
But I do look. So when you come to me
in your opulent sadness, I see
you do not want me
to unbutton you
so I cannot do the one thing
I can do.
Now it is almost one a.m. I am still at my desk
and you are upstairs at your desk a staircase
away from me. Already it is years
of you a staircase
away from me. To be near you
and not near you
is ordinary.
You
are ordinary.
Still, how many afternoons have I spent
peeling blue paint from
our porch steps, peering above
hedgerows, the few parked cars for the first
glimpse of you. How many hours under
the overgrown, pink Camillas, thinking
the color was wrong for you, thinking
you'd appear
after my next
blink.
Soon you'll come down the stairs
to tell me something. And I'll say,
okay. Okay. I'll say it
like that, say it just like
that, I'll go on being
your never-enough.
It's not the best in you
I long for. It's when you're noteless,
numb at the ends of my fingers, all is
all. I say it is.
~~~
Open the window and you want to fly out,
though you never actually do—
I think I see you, still there on the ledge,
where I've left you.
How pulled-awake and flung
can one life be?
Again I thought, It will end.
Again I promised and clung.
I learned there that
to cling was in my nature.
I think I see you, though you flash
quickly through the shutter.
I think I hear you, though I sleep.
Remember this as a bolero,
a finite flaring—
both the tulip tree
burning in full bloom
and the weeping silver birch.
~~~
In the northwest corner of Dakota, I saw a room someone had left, a plush sofa returning its button-eyed stare to the glance she gave it over her shoulder, the dog, too, turning. In the next room, the mattress,with mattress stories one after another tumbling out of each spring, the window she opened first thing, its vista of mile after mile, and the windmill hauling its load. 
               I saw that, and nothing alive—green oil-figured linoleum laid on counters,nails of bad craft, the ripped blackening edge that scared her more than the bed and the sound of the windmill winning its will from the aquifer night after night, the whack of her blade on the block. There are houses with too many knives sometimes she said, but when June ferned its way in she'd relent, take on its restraint, heave again on the stained sheets her burden of child, herself a torn girl again, combing her hair through fingers bruised by corn shocks, sweet juice in the cuts of her life.
                                        She began to think of the border and mustangs without brand. At night they'd bend over the bed and nuzzle. One ride was enough. She had sufficient magic to cling to a mane and fare over the windowsill. I see where the curtain fell and nobody mended the tear, I see where bare feet marked like fossils her pass in the rain.When he uncovers fiddleheads by the spring,why does he always think of that first sight of her thigh in the peach-colored dress, of his hand'ssearching moss with its red-gold stamens, the spring in that arid landscape like something from Canaan under his tongue? Even in old age he'd ponder the moment,lying under the moon forgiving himself, her, the world that bred their conundrum, washed in that rain.
~~~
Talking, we begin to find the way into
our hearts, we who knew no words,
words being a rare commodity
in those countries we left behind.
Both refugees and similarly deprived,
we marvel at the many things there
are to say: so many variations
and colors of the same thought, so
many different lengths in the words
that line up together on our tongues.
No scarcity, no rationing, no
waiting in line in order to buy
the same answer we heard each time
we asked, that one word, owned by
the state, manufactured by the state,
serving all purposes equally alike:
No, No, No, and sometimes Never.
~~~
It is not the moon, I tell you.
It is these flowers
lighting the yard.
I hate them.
I hate them as I hate sex,
the man’s mouth
sealing my mouth, the man’s
paralyzing body—
and the cry that always escapes,
the low, humiliating
premise of union—
In my mind tonight
I hear the question and pursuing answer
fused in one sound
that mounts and mounts and then
is split into the old selves,
the tired antagonisms. Do you see?
We were made fools of.
And the scent of mock orange
drifts through the window.
How can I rest?
How can I be content
when there is still
that odor in the world?
~~~
Would but indulgent Fortune sendTo me a kind, and faithful Friend,One who to Virtue’s Laws is true,And does her nicest Rules pursue;One Pious, Lib’ral, Just and Brave,And to his Passions not a Slave;Who full of Honour, void of Pride,Will freely praise, and freely chide;But not indulge the smallest Fault,Nor entertain one slighting Thought:Who still the same will ever prove,Will still instruct and still will love:In whom I safely may confide,And with him all my Cares divide:Who has a large capacious Mind,Join’d with a Knowledge unconfin’d:A Reason bright, a Judgement true,A Wit both quick, and solid too:Who can of all things talk with Ease,And whose Converse will ever please:Who charm’d with Wit, and inward Graces,Despises Fools with tempting Faces;And still a beauteous Mind does prizeAbove the most enchanting Eyes:I would not envy Queens their State,Nor once desire a happier Fate.
~~~
Loving you less than life, a little less
Than bitter-sweet upon a broken wall
Or brush-wood smoke in autumn, I confess
I cannot swear I love you not at all.
For there is that about you in this light—
A yellow darkness, sinister of rain—
Which sturdily recalls my stubborn sight
To dwell on you, and dwell on you again.
And I am made aware of many a week
I shall consume, remembering in what way
Your brown hair grows about your brow and cheek
And what divine absurdities you say:
Till all the world, and I, and surely you,
Will know I love you, whether or not I do.
 
~~~
" Yes !" I answered you last night ;
  " No !" this morning, Sir, I say !Colours, seen by candle-light,
  Will not look the same by day.When the tabors played their best,
  Lamps above, and laughs below —Love me sounded like a jest,
  Fit for Yes or fit for No ! Call me false, or call me free —
  Vow, whatever light may shine,No man on your face shall see
  Any grief for change on mine.Yet the sin is on us both —
  Time to dance is not to woo —Wooer light makes fickle troth —
  Scorn of me recoils on you ! Learn to win a lady's faith
  Nobly, as the thing is high ;Bravely, as for life and death —
  With a loyal gravity.Lead her from the festive boards,
  Point her to the starry skies,Guard her, by your truthful words,
  Pure from courtship's flatteries.By your truth she shall be true —
  Ever true, as wives of yore —And her Yes, once said to you,
  SHALL be Yes for evermore.
~~~
Things happen when you drink too much mescal.
One night, with not enough food in my belly,
he kept on buying.   I’m a girl who’ll fall
damn near in love with gratitude and, well, he
was hot and generous and so the least
that I could do was let him kiss me, hard
and soft and any way you want it, beast
and beauty, lime and salt—sweet Bacchus’ pards—
and when his friend showed up I felt so warm
and generous I let him kiss me too.
His buddy asked me if it was the worm
inside that makes me do the things I do.
I wasn’t sure which worm he meant, the one
I ate?   The one that eats at me alone?
~~~
‘The myrtle bush grew shadyDown by the ford.’‘Is it even so?’ said my lady.‘Even so!’ said my lord.‘The leaves are set too thick togetherFor the point of a sword.‘The arras in your room hangs close,No light between!You wedded one of those that see unseen.’‘Is it even so?’ said the King’s Majesty.‘Even so!’ said the Queen.
~~~
Up late watching slug porn, you confessyou had a boyfriend who could spin you like that, slug grace and slug ballet—we don’ttouch the topic of slime—and those eyes dangling from tentacle tips must be akind of love or lust, sighting farther andnearer all at once. (But are those eyes?)  Slug sublimity suggests love’s a drag, touch that lingers and leaves a wet trail of memory and... What did we do before YouTube? Boob tube. Boobs we have none; slugs, of course, don’t care, can’t tell girl from boy, (being, you know, hermaphrodites), and only want flesh to fly. Forget their infamous languor—here’s litheness in loving, buoyant miracles of want, one slug spiraling on the axis of another like a globe slapped by an insolent hand. Neither old nor young, we’re familiar with sluggishness, too tired to explain why nothing makes us spin like that: a-swirl, a pirouette, a gyre! It’s either fucking or marriage, I say,saying more than I mean. Why can’t lust belove and love be lust? you’re always asking, even now as the slugs begin their sluggishwithdrawal—each complete in love and lust;each mother and father to what they’ve madetogether; each alone, content, and free.
~~~
My own dear love, he is strong and bold
      And he cares not what comes after.
His words ring sweet as a chime of gold,
      And his eyes are lit with laughter.
He is jubilant as a flag unfurled—
      Oh, a girl, she’d not forget him.
My own dear love, he is all my world,—
      And I wish I’d never met him.
My love, he’s mad, and my love, he’s fleet,
      And a wild young wood-thing bore him!
The ways are fair to his roaming feet,
      And the skies are sunlit for him.
As sharply sweet to my heart he seems
      As the fragrance of acacia.
My own dear love, he is all my dreams,—
      And I wish he were in Asia.
My love runs by like a day in June,
      And he makes no friends of sorrows.
He’ll tread his galloping rigadoon
      In the pathway of the morrows.
He’ll live his days where the sunbeams start,
      Nor could storm or wind uproot him.
My own dear love, he is all my heart,—
      And I wish somebody’d shoot him.
~~~
White people leave the express
at 96th Street, collectively,
like pigeons from a live wire
or hope from the hearts of Harlem.
And I’m one of them, although
my lover sleeps two stops north between
Malcolm X and Adam Clayton Powell
Boulevards, wishing my ass
were cupped inside her knees and belly,
wishing this in a dream thick
with inequalities.
 
I live on Riverside Drive. My face
helped get me here. I was
ruddy with anticipation the day
I interviewed for the rooms
near the park with its
snow-covered maples. I was full
of undisguised hope as I
strolled along the river, believing
I belonged there, that my people
inherited this wonderland
unequivocally, as if they deserved it.
 
My lover buys twinkies from the Arabs,
bootleg tapes on ‘25th,
and carries a blade in her back
pocket although her hands
are the gentlest I’ve known.
She ignores the piss smells
on the corner, the sirens
at 4 A.M., the men whose brains
have dissolved in rum. And tries
to trust a white woman who
sleeps near the trees of Riverside.
 
When we go out together,
we avoid expensive
cafés on Columbus Avenue, jaunts
to the Upper East Side. Harlem
eyes us suspiciously or with
contempt beneath half-closed lids.
We have friends there,
hidden in the ruins like gold, who
accept us. When it snows,
we walk boldly anywhere, as if the snow
were a protection, or a death.
~~~
Toggle me up
on one last vanity flight
half drunk on a screw-top frizzante.
It takes a hell of a lot more to get me here
than it did when I had beauty, boys
when bedding me was the easy way to know me.
Don’t tuck me in
so tight. I’m not your grandma.
This rough blanket
its green red yellow indigo stripes
I traded for a perfectly warm beaver pelt.
Fly me once more
over my disloyal youth
and its hangdog slavering over men
whom age has de-sexed right along with me.
They broadcast impotent outrage
from aluminum tablets.
I collect speculums with Bakelite handles
arranging them by size
though it no longer matters.
~~~
Just for this evening, let's not mock them.
Not their curtsies or cross-garters
or ever-recurring pepper trees in their gardens
promising, promising.
At least they had ideas about love.
All day we've driven past cornfields, past cows poking their heads
through metal contraptions to eat.
We've followed West 84, and what else?
Irrigation sprinklers fly past us, huge wooden spools in the fields,
lounging sheep, telephone wires,
yellowing flowering shrubs.
Before us, above us, the clouds swell, layers of them,
the violet underneath of clouds.
Every idea I have is nostalgia. Look up:
there is the sky that passenger pigeons darkened and filled—
darkened for days, eclipsing sun, eclipsing all other sound
with the thunder of their wings.
After a while, it must have seemed that they followed
not instinct or pattern but only
one another.
When they stopped, Audubon observed,
they broke the limbs of stout trees by the weight of the numbers.
And when we stop we'll follow—what?
Our hearts?
The Puritans thought that we are granted the ability to love
only through miracle,
but the troubadours knew how to burn themselves through,
how to make themselves shrines to their own longing.
The spectacular was never behind them.
Think of days of those scarlet-breasted, blue-winged birds above you.
Think of me in the garden, humming
quietly to myself in my blue dress,
a blue darker than the sky above us, a blue dark enough for storms,
though cloudless.
At what point is something gone completely?
The last of the sunlight is disappearing
even as it swells—
Just for this evening, won't you put me before you
until I'm far enough away you can
believe in me?
Then try, try to come closer—
my wonderful and less than.
~~~
I like to touch your tattoos in complete
darkness, when I can’t see them. I’m sure of
where they are, know by heart the neat
lines of lightning pulsing just above
your nipple, can find, as if by instinct, the blue
swirls of water on your shoulder where a serpent
twists, facing a dragon. When I pull you
to me, taking you until we’re spent
and quiet on the sheets, I love to kiss
the pictures in your skin. They’ll last until
you’re seared to ashes; whatever persists
or turns to pain between us, they will still
be there. Such permanence is terrifying.
So I touch them in the dark; but touch them, trying.
~~~
You keep me waiting in a truck
with its one good wheel stuck in the ditch,   
while you piss against the south side of a tree.
Hurry. I’ve got nothing on under my skirt tonight.   
That still excites you, but this pickup has no windows   
and the seat, one fake leather thigh,   
pressed close to mine is cold.   
I’m the same size, shape, make as twenty years ago,   
but get inside me, start the engine;   
you’ll have the strength, the will to move.   
I’ll pull, you push, we’ll tear each other in half.
Come on, baby, lay me down on my back.   
Pretend you don’t owe me a thing   
and maybe we’ll roll out of here,   
leaving the past stacked up behind us;
old newspapers nobody’s ever got to read again.
~~~
I want a red dress.
I want it flimsy and cheap,
I want it too tight, I want to wear it
until someone tears it off me.
I want it sleeveless and backless,
this dress, so no one has to guess
what’s underneath. I want to walk down
the street past Thrifty’s and the hardware store
with all those keys glittering in the window,
past Mr. and Mrs. Wong selling day-old
donuts in their café, past the Guerra brothers
slinging pigs from the truck and onto the dolly,
hoisting the slick snouts over their shoulders.
I want to walk like I’m the only
woman on earth and I can have my pick.
I want that red dress bad.
I want it to confirm
your worst fears about me,
to show you how little I care about you
or anything except what
I want. When I find it, I’ll pull that garment
from its hanger like I’m choosing a body
to carry me into this world, through
the birth-cries and the love-cries too,
and I’ll wear it like bones, like skin,
it’ll be the goddamned
dress they bury me in.
~~~
If you press a stone with your finger,
Sir Isaac Newton observed,
The finger is also
Pressed by the stone.
But can a woman, pressed by memory’s finger,
In the deep night, alone,
Of her softness move
The airy thing
That presses upon her
With the whole weight of love? This
Sir Isaac said nothing of.
~~~
She was in love with the same danger
everybody is. Dangerous
as it is to love a stranger,
she was in love. With that same danger
an adulteress risks a husband’s anger.
Stealthily death enters a house:
she was in love with that danger.
Everybody is dangerous.
~~~
She arrived at the country mansion in a silver limousine.
She’d sent out invitations and everything:
her name written twice with “&” in the middle,
the calligraphy of coupling.
She strode down the aisle to “At Last” by Etta James,
faced the celebrant like a keen soldier reporting for duty,
her voice shaky yet sure. I do. I do.
“You may now kiss the mirror.” Applause. Confetti.
Every single one of the hundred and forty guests
deemed the service “unimprovable.”
Especially the vows. So “from the heart.”
Her wedding gown was ivory; pointedly off-white,
“After all, we’ve shared a bed for thirty-two years,”
she quipped in her first speech,
“I’m hardly virginal if you know what I mean.”
(No one knew exactly what she meant.)
Not a soul questioned their devotion.
You only had to look at them. Hand cupped in hand.
Smiling out of the same eyes. You could sense
their secret language, bone-deep, blended blood.
Toasts were frequent, tearful. One guest
eyed his wife — hovering harmlessly at the bar — and
imagined what his life might’ve been if
he’d responded, years ago, to that offer in his head:“I’m the only one who will ever truly understand you.
Marry me, Derek. I love you. Marry me.”
~~~
Kissing the bankteller outside his stairs
In Brighton, MA I cannot lie. I felt the hope
That we once felt, if only for an instant
O the lovely bankteller, like a moose he
Rode my spirit quite outside my clothes
And chrysanthemums sprouted I assure you
Out my nipples when he kissed them.
And the pureness of not knowing him at all
Was really what we all feel when we enter this earth.
There is a newness to the best things that cannot
Be excelled and old things like old love die and rot.
There are old ideas in the world that should be forgotten
There are old ideas and old phrases that should at least
Be recycled for others
There are old plans now that should be new.
There are old thoughts in your head, my reader, and let them die.
Follow me, I am the crusader of the new
My spirit is a plastic rod that channels all our births.
And in the mouths of the little beasts, we shall find the great
Ocean that spits up black bugs all glittering on its shores.
You know there is an anthem to the ages.
There is an anthem of the ages.
This is that anthem
This is that anthem
~~~
My heart is a fancy place
Where giant reddish-purple cauliflowers
& white ones in French & English are outside
Waiting to welcome you to a boat
Over the low black river for a big dinner
There's alot of choice among the foods
Even a tortured lamb served in pieces
En croute on a plate so hot as a rack
Of clouds blown over the cold filthy river
We are entitled to see anytime while we
Use the tablecovers to love each other
Publicly dishing out imitative luxuries
To show off poetry's extreme generosity
Then home in the heart of a big limousine
~~~
I wanted to tell the veterinary assistant about the cat video Jason sent me
But I resisted for fear she'd think it strange
I am very lonely
Yesterday my boyfriend called me, drunk again
And interspersed between ringing tears and clinginess
He screamed at me with a kind of bitterness
No other human had before to my ears
And told me that I was no good
Well maybe he didn't mean that
But that is what I heard
When he told me my life was not worthwhile
And my life's work the work of the elite.
I say I want to save the world but really
I want to write poems all day
I want to rise, write poems, go to sleep,
Write poems in my sleep
Make my dreams poems
Make my body a poem with beautiful clothes
I want my face to be a poem
I have just learned how to apply
Eyeliner to the corners of my eyes to make them appear wide
There is a romantic abandon in me always
I want to feel the dread for others
I can feel it through song
Only through song am I able to sum up so many words into a few
Like when he said I am no good
I am no good
Goodness is not the point anymore
Holding on to things
Now that's the point
~~~
I  Today I dissected a squid, the late acacia tossing its pollen across the black of the lab bench. In a few months the maples  will be bleeding. That was the thing:  there was no blood only textures of gills creased like satin,  suction cups as planets in rows. Be careful not to cut your finger